British Labour Party election manifesto: 1979'The Labour Way is the Better Way'


Foreward: 
Now, more than ever, we need Labour's traditional values of cooperation, social 
justice, and fairness. This manifesto restates these Labour principles in an 
action programme with a strong sense of the future. They appeal to all our 
people - young and old. 
The world is changing rapidly. New industrial nations are rising to challenge 
our key industries on which British jobs and living standards depend. 
The Labour Government is taking firm action to equip Britain to adapt to these 
changes and to seize new opportunities. And we will take great care to protect 
working people and their families from the hardships of change. 
But although the 1980s will present a tough challenge, this country will have 
many things in our favour. North Sea oil offers a golden prospect as do our 
reserves of natural gas and coal. We must use these resources wisely to plan our 
future to create new wealth, new jobs, and to look after the family, the 
elderly, and those in need. 
Too much is at stake to let the Conservatives frustrate the hopes of the coming 
decade by turning back the clock to the policies that they tried in the early 
seventies and that failed so badly before. 
The Government's industrial strategy is about how to create more wealth and more 
jobs through a constructive national partnership with unions and management. The 
Conservatives will not admit that nowadays governments must step in to help 
create employment, to limit prices rises, to assist industry to modernize 
itself. They are ready to gamble the people's future on a return to the 
nineteenth century free market' - despite its pitiless social consequences. They 
are as dangerously out of their time as a penny farthing on the motorway. 
Together the people and the Labour Government, even without a parliamentary 
majority, have achieved much these past five years, as the manifesto shows. In 
an uncertain world suffering the worst economic trouble for 40 years we have 
pointed the way forward. 
But nobody who cares about Britain can rest satisfied until far, far more has 
been accomplished. As long as there are men and women struggling with low pay, 
mothers stretching the household budget to make ends meet, youngsters in search 
of a job, children learning in out of date classrooms, patients queuing for a 
hospital bed or families without a decent home - then there is work for a Labour 
Government. 
Our purpose is to overcome the evils of inequality, poverty, racial bigotry, and 
make Britain truly one nation. 
For these we need a Labour majority in Parliament. This manifesto sets out our 
aims for the next five years. Here are five of our priorities. 
1. We must keep a curb on inflation and prices. Inflation is our enemy because 
rising prices hit most hardly at the pensioner, the low paid and the housewife, 
and inflation causes loss of jobs. Labour has brought inflation down from the 
alarming level caused by the Conservatives' failure to control the supply of 
money. 
Now we set ourselves the task of bringing inflation down to 5 per cent in three 
years. It is an ambitious target. We need the assistance of everyone. And 
everyone will be better off if we succeed. 
2. We will carry forward the task of putting into practice the new framework to 
improve industrial relations that we have hammered out with the TUC. The first 
step has been the creation of a new standing pay commission which will prevent 
the disruption of services to the public in future. 
Next, each year there will be three-way talks between ministers, management and 
unions to consider the best way forward for our country's economy. Germany's 
Social Democratic Government under Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt has proved 
that this is a good way to reach agreement on how to expand output, incomes and 
living standards. 
I am realistic enough to know that there are bound to be set backs. But 
experience reinforces what all of us know in our hearts - there is no sound 
alternative to working together. 
A Conservative free-for-all in pay and prices would mean endless pitched battles 
that would be fatal to the interests of all of us. The Labour way is the better 
way. 
3. We give a high priority to working for a return to full employment. A good 
job is a basic human right. During the last five years we have responded to the 
worldwide unemployment crisis by helping more than one million people to take up 
new jobs or new training. 
Now we will concentrate special attention on more jobs and training for the 
regions, the young and the long-term unemployed, and give them hope for the 
future. 
4. We are deeply concerned to enlarge people's freedom. Our policy will be to 
tilt the balance of power back to the individual and the neighbourhood, and away 
from the bureaucrats of town hall, company board room, the health service and 
Whitehall. 
Industrial democracy - giving working men and women a voice in the decisions 
which affect their jobs - is an idea whose time has come. Council tenants will 
have more freedom from bureaucratic control in their own homes. Parents and 
teachers will have a greater freedom to influence the running of their 
children's schools. Whitehall will devolve power, in an acceptable form to 
Scotland. Local services will be handed back to local authorities closer to the 
people. These are practical ways to set the people free. 
5. We will use Britain's influence to strengthen world peace and defeat world 
poverty. Europe has been at peace for over 30 years but ours is still a 
dangerous world with more armaments than ever before. Labour will keep Britain 
strong but we will also work hard for disarmament. It cannot be right that 15 
million children in poorer countries die before they are five - yet the world 
spends so much on the means of destruction. There is a compelling moral need to 
raise the standard of life of all the world's citizens - no matter where they 
live. 
We are ready and willing to work with our European partners in closer unity. But 
we must record that in some aspects of its work the Common Market lacks common 
sense. 
Above all the agricultural policy is wasteful and expensive. In standing 
squarely against the discredited aspects of the dear-food policy, we are in fact 
defending the interests of European families just as much as British families. A 
nonsense is a nonsense in any language. 
The Labour Government will give a strong lead in the decade ahead. But no 
government can do it all. Our purpose is to deepen the sense of unity and 
kinship and community feeling that has always marked out our fellow countrymen 
and women. No nation can succeed by accepting benefits without responsibilities. 
I ask everybody who shares our ideals and our faith in Britain to join with us 
in securing the return of a government that dares to turn the dream of a caring 
society into practical action. And then work with us to complete the building of 
a Britain offering hope, social justice, and fairness to all.
James Callaghan 


This election is about the Britain of tomorrow - the kind of country we want to 
live in, the kind of community we wish for our children. In choosing their 
government, the people will be deciding what values and ideals will guide the 
nation in the critical years ahead. In this manifesto, Labour puts forward its 
policies for the future. The Labour Party is a democratic socialist party and 
proud of it. Labour seeks to build a stronger and more prosperous Britain - and 
we are determined to see that all our people share fully in that prosperity. We 
want a Britain which is open and democratic and which puts fair earnings for 
working people and the needs of the under-privileged before the demands of 
private profit. 
Over the past five years, the Labour Government have laid the foundations of a 
stronger economy. 
When Labour came to govern, in March, 1974, Britain was facing the most 
dangerous crisis since the war. The Tory programme of confrontation and social 
injustice had brought the country almost to its knees. Unlit streets, unheated 
homes, shut-down factories - these were the fruits of the Tory three-day week. 
We were £1,000m in deficit in our national balance of payments, even before the 
rising oil prices. Prices were soaring month by month. Industry was enfeebled by 
years of under-investment. To top it all, Britain then had to contend with the 
four-fold rises in oil prices and the worldwide inflation and unemployment. 
Our inheritance was a Britain in crisis. The new Labour Government sought 
cooperation in place of confrontation. Instead of division, we offered social 
justice. In place of compulsion, we worked to win consent for the tough economic 
measures we knew were needed. We forged a new partnership between the Labour 
Government and working people. 
Our country has come a long way since then. The rate of inflation has been 
brought under control. It has become possible to improve living standards, to 
cut taxation and increase child benefit, pensions and benefits to the disabled 
to rates which more than overtake costs and inflation. 
And over the past year, unemployment has at last begun to fall. Now we offer a 
programme to carry Britain through the 1980s. 
The Fight against Rising Prices 
Nothing so undermines a nation as inflation. Not only does it make the family's 
task of budgeting more difficult, it is a threat to jobs and a standing 
invitation to our overseas competitors to invade our markets. 
Now, with the renewed cooperation of the trade union movement, Labour will 
continue the battle against rising prices. With the wholehearted backing of the 
TUC, we have set ourselves a new target, to get inflation down to 5 per cent by 
1982. 
Our approach will be threefold: 
Firstly, Labour will strengthen the Price Commission, giving it greater powers 
to initiate investigations and reduce prices, in contrast to the Tories who 
threaten its abolition. We will expand its powers to combine its functions with 
those of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to ensure that consumers are not 
exploited by monopoly producers or unfair practices. We will further strengthen 
and extend consumer protection, in both the public and private sectors. 
Secondly, Labour will seek radical reform of the Common Market's common 
agricultural policy, and will oppose any further increases in common prices 
until food surpluses have disappeared. 
Thirdly, in contrast to the Tories' savage free-for-all which leads to soaring 
inflation and industrial chaos, the Labour Government will work with the TUC to 
achieve our agreed inflation target of 5 per cent in 1982. The Labour Government 
and the TUC have jointly agreed to set up a standing commission on comparability 
which will ensure that public sector workers, including those who are low-paid, 
receive fair wages that are in line with those paid in the private sector. 
For the private sector, we declare our aim to be a high wage, high productivity, 
low unit cost economy. To this end, we pledge ourselves to make a reality of 
fair deal collective bargaining, in keeping with the criteria set down in the 
joint statement. 
This agreement is a far better way of achieving industrial peace, prosperity and 
more stable prices than confrontation with the trade union movement. 
Here is an agreement which can deliver industrial peace, fair wages, and greater 
price stability. 
Jobs and Prosperity 
In the major industrial nations of Europe and America, 17 million people are out 
of work. In Britain alone we have to find jobs for 170,000 new workers every 
year. 
The Labour Government will pursue policies which give a high priority to the 
return to full employment. This must go hand-in-hand with keeping down 
inflation. We therefore aim at a rate of growth of 3 per cent or more. 
Our North Sea oil gives us an advantage in securing full employment and a rise 
in living standards. The new technologies also hold out the prospect of faster 
growth and a better quality of life for all. This is particularly true of 
microtechnologies (the silicon chip) which will have a major impact on the lives 
of everybody. Only a Labour Government can ensure that our people as a whole 
derive the benefit. 
In order to take full advantage of these opportunities, we must improve our 
industrial competitiveness at home and abroad - and that means making sure our 
industries adapt to new markets and technological changes. It also means easing 
the costs of rapid industrial change for working people. The use of crude market 
forces advocated by the Tories will not and cannot achieve these changes in a 
way that is acceptable to the British people. What we need is a firm industrial 
and employment strategy from a Labour Government aimed at increasing 
productivity, adding to investment, and creating new jobs. 
We shall expand and improve programmes of training and retraining in skills. 
We shall expand the work and finance of the National Enterprise Board, using 
public ownership to sustain and create new jobs, and ensure that we get an 
adequate return on our investment. 
We shall continue our strong policy of regional incentives. 
We shall expand the work of the Welsh and the Scottish Development Agencies. The 
Labour Government will create similar development agencies in the English 
regions suffering similar problems. 
To ensure that private industry plays its full part in the drive for prosperity 
and full employment, we shall conclude planning agreements with the major 
industrial companies, with the necessary back-up statutory powers to do so. We 
shall establish within Government the necessary arrangements to make this 
effective. 
We reaffirm the policy that we have pursued that wherever we give direct aid to 
a company Out of public funds, we shall reserve the right to take a 
proportionate share of the ownership of the company; and wherever possible, this 
public support will be channelled through the planning agreement system. 
Labour will continue with major aids to investment, including the selective 
investment scheme which has already supported projects in excess of £1,000m. 
Labour will develop the work and funding of the Cooperative Development Agency 
in expanding cooperative enterprise. 
This is a positive strategy for industry, based on cooperation between 
Government, trade unions, and management. The new agreement between the 
Government and the TUC, which includes provision for an agreed annual assessment 
of the nation's economic prospects, lays the foundation for working together in 
the 1980s. 
Labour will work for an international agreement under which all countries are 
helped and encouraged to expand their economies to the limit of their productive 
capacity and so stimulate world trade. This will help British exports to 
increase still faster. But to do this, Britain needs a healthy and expanding 
economy. 
We also need a programme to protect employment while the necessary changes and 
modernization of our industry takes place. We will not allow our industries to 
be wiped out by excessive imports before they have had a chance to recover their 
strength. The Labour Government will ensure that imports enter our market only 
within acceptable limits. 
Under the Labour Government, we shall continue with programmes like the 
short-time working compensation scheme, the job release scheme, the small firms 
employment subsidy, and job creation programmes which have already created and 
saved over one million jobs. 
We do not accept that individuals whose jobs have disappeared should remain 
unemployed for periods of time which demoralise them and impoverish their 
families. We pledge ourselves to the progressive introduction of a scheme which 
will ensure within the lifetime of the next Parliament that no one shall be 
unemployed for more than 12 months without receiving either the offer of a job 
or of retraining. 
Labour will also promote an expansion in housing, the health service, education 
and other social services which have such a crucial part to play in providing 
jobs as well as in meeting vital social needs. 
If full employment is to be achieved, longer holidays, time off for study, 
earlier voluntary retirement, and a progressive move to a 35-hour working week, 
must play an increasing role during the 1980s. But these changes in the pattern 
of employment are not only necessary to keep jobs, but also to improve the 
quality of living for working people, to give them more leisure and the means to 
enjoy it to which their work and modern technology entitles them. 
Labour must ensure that the financial institutions of this country play their 
part in our programme for the revival of industry. We acknowledge the many 
successes of the financial sector, but we are also concerned that the lure of 
short-term profit can outweigh the social gains to be had from industrial 
investment. 
The banking sector would benefit from increased competition. We therefore intend 
to bring about a major development in the Girobank so that it will compete on 
equal terms with the big four clearing banks and improve standards of service to 
small savers. The National Savings Bank has a valuable role to play in providing 
a unique service and in making a significant contribution to financing the 
Government's operations, thus reducing our reliance on the City. By developing 
the Girobank and the National Savings Bank to their full potential, a Labour 
Government will ensure for the country a vigorous public banking sector. 
Agriculture and Fishing 
Agriculture has always flourished best under Labour Governments. We have already 
taken many steps to encourage production, while giving consumers and workers in 
the industry the best possible deal. Agricultural workers in tied cottages have 
been given security of tenure in England and Wales; we intend to do the same for 
Scotland. 
Elsewhere we give our proposals to reform the EEC's common agricultural policy. 
There must also be a vigorous expansion of agriculture at home. Labour will: 
Develop measures of special assistance to farmers on hill and marginal land. 
Consider in the light of the official enquiry we have set up into agricultural 
land, protection for farmers against the intrusion of financial institutions 
into this field. Continue to demand a common fisheries policy that gives 
preference in our own waters to a strong British fishing industry - betrayed by 
the last Tory Government - with a secure future. We will continue to take, and 
enforce, national measures to conserve stocks. We shall complete the process of 
decasualisation in the industry. 
Energy 
The world energy situation is deteriorating. Energy policy is vitally important 
to our survival. We shall strengthen the democratic planning of the long-term 
developments of Britain's own energy sources, backed by the necessary powers, 
under full parliamentary control. 
Britain is almost alone among major industrial nations in achieving energy 
self-sufficiency; our resources have been developed, thanks to the skills of our 
scientists and of the workers. The Tories handed over our oil wealth to the 
multinationals. We changed that and will ensure that this energy wealth is 
developed wisely for industrial regeneration and public provision, and its 
fruits distributed fairly. 
We will continue to support Plan for Coal' for the mining industry, which has a 
key role to play in our energy future. 
In any programme for nuclear power, safety must continue to be the dominant 
factor. Any such development would have to take place within the public sector. 
We shall maintain strict safeguards over the disposal of nuclear waste. We have 
not decided whether to build a commercial fast breeder reactor. A major study 
and public inquiry would be held before any decision were to be taken. 
We shall progressively increase the national stake in the North Sea, to 
safeguard the British people and regenerate British industry. 
We have initiated and will continue a major programme of alternative energy, 
energy saving, through insulation grants, advice to industry, the 'Save-It' 
campaign, and an energy-saving approach to transport. 
We shall continue to help people to afford adequate light, heat, and power in 
their homes. 
A Fairer Britain 
Economic success is not an end in itself. For the Labour Party, prosperity and 
fairness march hand in hand on the road to a better Britain. During the next 
Parliament, we intend to continue our fight against all forms of social 
injustice. 
The tax system must be fair and seen to be so. We will mount an all-out attack 
on tax evasion. Everybody must make their fair contribution to the country's 
finances. In the next Parliament, we shall introduce an annual wealth tax on the 
small minority of rich people whose total net personal wealth exceeds £150,000. 
Labour will continue to reduce the burden of income tax, and raise the tax 
threshold below which people pay no income tax. 
Despite the difficulties of the economic situation, Labour has kept its pledge 
to look after the poor and vulnerable in our society - pensioners, the sick or 
disabled people, and the unemployed. Pensions are up by 20 per cent in real 
terms on the Tory level. Labour's new child benefit gives £4 a week per child 
for every mother. Disabled people have new benefits: a non-contributory 
invalidity pension, an invalid car allowance, and a mobility allowance for 
people who cannot walk. 
The Labour Government will build on our record of achievement. Labour will: 
As a next step towards a married couple pension of half gross average earnings 
and a single person's pension of one-third gross average earnings, increase 
pensions in November to around £35 for a married couple and £22 for a single 
person. Widows', invalidity and other long-term benefits will be increased in 
line. 
As a step towards meeting our objective that families get as much help for their 
children when working as they do on short-term benefits, increase child benefit 
to £4.50 in November as a next step towards further help. 
Give further cash and other help to one-parent families. Raise the burial grant 
to a more realistic level. 
For disabled people, Labour will: 
Work for the further implementation of Labour's Chronically Sick and Disabled 
Persons Act. 
Increase the mobility allowance again next November and continue to pay the 
mobility allowance beyond pension age without an upper age limit. 
Introduce a new disablement allowance to include the blind, varying according to 
the severity of disablement. 
A Healthier Nation 
The nation's health must have priority. We reject Tory plans to create two 
health services: one for the rich, financed by private insurance with a 
second-class service for the rest of us. Labour reaffirms its belief in a 
comprehensive national health service for all our people. We oppose Tory 
proposals for higher prescription charges and charges for seeing a doctor or 
being in hospital. Our aim is to abolish all charges in the NHS. 
For all the talk of cuts, the truth is that the Labour Government are spending 
over £600m a year more on health in real terms than the Tories. Labour will 
devote a higher proportion of the nation's wealth to the health service and the 
personal social services. 
Labour's health priorities include a renewed shift from hospital treatment to 
care in the community through family doctors and health centres with supporting 
social services; a comprehensive family planning service within the NHS; more 
emphasis on the prevention of illness and handicap; a fairer share of health 
funds across the country; more help for the frail elderly, the mentally ill, and 
handicapped; better training and opportunities for nurses and all workers in the 
health services; a new career structure for hospital doctors; and a greater 
recognition and reward to those consultants whose only professional commitment 
is to the NHS. 
We will streamline the bureaucratic and costly structure the Tories created and 
give a bigger say in running the NHS to the public and staff. 
We are phasing-out the remaining private beds in NHS hospitals. We shall stop 
queue-jumping. 
Education 
The Labour Party believes in equality of opportunity. Universal comprehensive 
education, which is central to our policy, must be completed in the 1980s. 
Already class sizes are the lowest ever recorded. The ratio of pupils to 
teachers is now only 23.6 in primary schools and 16.9 in secondary schools. 
Labour will continue to give high priority to reducing class sizes further. 
Independent schools still represent a major obstacle to equality of opportunity. 
Labour's aim is to end, as soon as possible, fee-paying in such schools, while 
safeguarding schools for the handicapped. Labour will end as soon as possible 
the remaining public subsidies and public support to independent schools. 
The Under-fives 
Under this Labour Government, the proportion of 3- and 4-year-olds in nursery 
classes and schools has doubled. Local authorities will be encouraged to do much 
more. Our aim is to provide nursery education for 90 per cent of our 4-year-olds 
and half of our 3-year-olds by the early 1980s. 
The Needs of Youth 
We will provide a universal scheme of education and training for all 16-19 year 
olds, if necessary backed by statute. We will remove the financial barriers 
which prevent many young people from low income families from continuing their 
education after 16. 
We will reintroduce legislation for income-related mandatory awards to all 16-18 
year olds on all full-time courses. 
Further and Higher Education 
Further education places have increased by 25,000 under Labour. Labour will 
substantially increase the opportunities for people from working-class 
backgrounds -particularly adults - to enter further and higher education. We 
want to see more workers given time off work for study. To this end, the places 
at the Open University have increased from 42,000 in 1974 to 80,000 in 1978. We 
propose to extend the present mandatory grant system. Labour supported the adult 
literacy scheme, and will ensure its continuation. 
Youth 
Britain has the best youth programme in Europe. We have the youth opportunities 
programme, which guarantees every school-leaver either a job or a training place 
or employment experience. We are supporting a great range of opportunities for 
young people. Labour will see the youth service expanded to meet the social and 
recreational needs of young people. 
Sport 
In a society where leisure is increasing year by year, Labour wants to make 
facilities for sport and leisure available to all. We will continue to put more 
money into these activities. 
Homes for All 
Over 1.5 million homes have been completed since Labour took office. A further 
one million sub-standard or near slum houses have been substantially improved 
with Government finance, under the 1974 Housing Act. The homeless have had a new 
deal. And yet too many of our people still live in unacceptable housing 
conditions. We will continue a substantial programme of housebuilding and home 
improvement. 
Under our new system of housing investment programmes, local councils will 
continue to play a central part in meeting housing needs. 
We reject the philosophy that tenants are second-class citizens. Labour has 
already published its new Housing Bill which will give a new deal to council 
tenants to give them security of tenure; the right to a written tenancy 
agreement; the right to improve the home; the right to take in lodgers; the 
right to be consulted on housing management decisions; easier residential 
qualifications; and a new national scheme to help tenants to move from one part 
of the country to another. 
We will improve the quality of our less popular council estates, which will mean 
relaxing the rules under which improvements to estates less than 30 years old 
cannot attract Government subsidy. 
Labour does not oppose the sale of council houses to sitting tenants of two 
years' standing who want to buy, so long as such sales are at a fair price and 
do not damage a local authority's ability to meet the demands for decent homes 
to rent. But Labour will continue to oppose the sales of council housing in 
areas of serious housing need. 
Labour also seeks to widen choice, and we shall therefore continue to help those 
who wish to buy their own homes. 
Labour will: 
Carry through its new home loan plan to give saving bonuses and interest-free 
loans of up to £600 to first-time buyers. 
Examine ways of expanding the scheme under which building societies lend to 
home-buyers nominated by local councils, particularly for older, cheaper 
properties. 
Introduce new ways of lowering the cost and speeding the process of house 
purchase. Labour has set up the Royal Commission on Legal Services, which will 
be reporting on conveyancing. Labour policy is to end the monopoly on house 
conveyancing now enjoyed by solicitors, and improve leasehold enfranchisement. 
With the growth of home ownership and council housing, private renting has 
entered an irreversible decline. We stand by the principles of security of 
tenure and rent regulations, and will legislate to close loopholes in the Rent 
Acts. We shall continue to encourage socially-accountable landlords - local 
authorities, housing associations and housing cooperatives - to take over 
privately rented property except where an owner-occupier lets part of his own 
home. 
Labour will give private tenants access to improvement grants on the same basis 
as owners. We shall make it easier for a tenant to force a landlord to do 
necessary repairs. We will legislate to give further protection to those who 
live in mobile homes and to the owners of holiday caravans. We will set up a new 
housing tribunal to replace the present confusing jumble of courts, tribunals 
and committees dealing with rents, security of tenure, and other housing 
problems. 
Labour will give new rights to everyone whose home is tied to their job. 
Building and Our Future 
A well-organized and efficient construction industry is essential to the 
achievement of many of our economic and social objectives. Labour will: 
Plan and coordinate public sector demand on the industry, in order to help 
stabilize the industry's workload. 
Press forward with plans for decasualization and job security in the industry, 
building on the work of the Construction Industry Manpower Board, and giving 
their proposed registration scheme statutory backing if necessary. 
Encourage the development of building workers' cooperatives. 
Expand local authority direct labour organizations, ensuring that they are 
efficiently run as separate municipal enterprises, publicly accountable for 
their performance. 
Develop and strengthen existing building capacity in the public sector so as to 
establish pace-making public enterprise for large and medium sized construction 
projects. 
Labour and The Land 
At the heart of all planning policy is the problem of the land. Labour's 
Community Land Act provides the means to tackle land speculation through public 
ownership. We shall seek to clarify and amend the regulations surrounding land 
valuation, not least to ensure that land is valued very much more closely to its 
present use value. We shall use it to ensure that social criteria rather than 
maximum profit decides how land is to be used. We intend to set up a publicly 
accessible register of all land. 
We will authorize local authorities to charge rates on land which is left 
unused. We have simplified planning procedures. We intend that in future 
planning permissions not acted upon after five years will not be automatically 
renewed. 
The Inner City 
Labour is committed to save our inner cities. With the inner city partnerships, 
the new 
Urban Area Act, and the increased urban programme, Labour has begun to breathe 
new life into our inner cities. 
First, we must bring back more jobs to these areas. Our national industrial 
policy will be used to bring investment to the inner cities. We will mount a 
concerted effort to stimulate the development of small firms and worker 
cooperatives in these areas. 
Secondly, we will bring about during the lifetime of the next Parliament a 
further increase in the expenditure earmarked for refurbishing our inner cities, 
for education, for housing, and for the social services. 
Rural Areas 
The Labour Government will take measures to arrest the decline in the quality of 
life in rural areas. We will increase the funds available to the Development 
Commission, and widen its scope. We will reestablish the Rural Development 
Boards in England and ensure that the Co-operative Development Agency, the NEB, 
the tourist boards and the Manpower Services Commission play an active role in 
rural job creation. We shall encourage new forms of agriculture - such as fish 
farming. 
Recognizing the importance of an adequate integrated rural transport service, we 
will provide greater support for rural buses, encourage improvements in the 
frequency and timetabling of conventional services, and open freight rail lines 
to passenger services. 
We will improve and increase public sector housing in rural areas and improve 
their educational facilities and personal social services. 
Our Environment 
Labour is proud of its record on environmental matters. Our Standing Royal 
Commission on Environmental Pollution has set the pace for advance. For the 
future, however, we will have to give still higher priority to this important 
issue. 
Labour will: 
Develop policies for resource conservation. 
Use our campaign for a better environment to provide the basis of secured 
employment, eg in pollution control and in waste recycling. 
Further reduce the lead content in petrol. 
Provide an annual State of the Environment' report to Parliament. Ensure that, 
before the inquiry stage of major development proposals - perhaps two or three a 
year - the environmental effects are subject to detailed analysis and the report 
published. 
Introduce an extended clean-up campaign - 'Making Britain Clean and Green', and 
start a real drive by local authorities and voluntary groups to clear up 
derelict land, and use it to the benefit of the community. 
Transport 
The majority of our people still depend on public transport. Labour believes in 
maintaining and improving within an integrated transport system. We will 
encourage closer coordination at local level between road and rail. 
Railways 
Under Labour, there will never be another Beeching. We will maintain the present 
rail network and increase investment in the future. As much freight as possible 
must be carried by rail; and the scheme whereby companies receive grants for 
installing railway facilities will be extended. 
Buses, especially in country areas, will continue to require a permanent and 
substantial amount of public support to meet social needs. In areas where free 
travel does not yet exist, Labour will bring in a nationwide, off-peak, 
half-fares scheme for OAPs, the blind and the disabled. 
We will sort out the present confusion surrounding arrangements for children's 
fares, so that there are free fares up to the age of five, and reduced fares up 
to 16. Those benefiting from the present free travel to school schemes will not 
be affected. 
For the motorist, we want to reduce bureaucracy and ensure fair treatment. The 
phased abolition of vehicle excise duty will remove one source of annoyance and 
irritation. Labour will press for major improvements for customers in motorway 
service areas and garage repairs generally. 
Heavy lorries will be made to carry, through taxation, their full share of road 
costs, including environmental costs. We will take further measures to reduce 
noise and pollution. The National Freight Corporation must be enabled to provide 
the basis for expanding the public sector in the road haulage industry. The 
Labour Government will continue to oppose any proposals to increase the 
permitted maximum weight limit for heavy lorries, which are inconsistent with 
road safety and the needs of the environment. 
The road building programme will remain at its present level - but we will adopt 
a more selective approach than in the past. More by-passes will be built. 
Highway inquiries will also be more open, wider in scope, and with inspectors 
clearly seen to be independent. 
In the ports industry, we reaffirm our policy to bring commercial ports and 
cargo handling into public ownership. 
A Wider, More Open Democracy 
A central theme of our programme for the eighties is the protection and 
enhancement of 
our democracy. 
Democracy at Work 
The time has come to recognize the increasing desire of employees to have a 
larger say in the decisions which vitally affect their working lives and jobs. 
We also wish to harness their energies and experience in a positive partnership 
to improve our industrial relationships in a way which reduced conflict and 
increased cooperation. We therefore commit the Labour Government to a major 
extension of industrial democracy. Democratic practice and good industrial 
relations means single status in industry and a dignified respect for all 
workers, whatever their plant grading. 
We recognize - as have other countries - that employees should be entitled to 
fall back on certain basic rights if agreement is not achieved. To this end, we 
will encourage recognized trade unions to establish joint representation 
committees in all companies employing more than 500 people, and place a legal 
obligation on employers to discuss company plans with these committees. We will 
establish an industrial democracy commission to stimulate and monitor schemes of 
industrial democracy in the private sector and nationalised industries. 
Devolution 
In our 1974 manifesto, we promised to create elected assembles in Scotland and 
Wales as part of our programme of decentralization and devolution of power. 
Following the result of the referendum in Wales, it is clear that the majority 
there does not want an assembly, and we accept their decision. In Scotland, 
however, a majority voted for devolution. 
We reaffirm our commitment to devolution for Scotland. We are therefore ready to 
discuss constructively with all concerned any changes which would make the 
scheme in the present Act more widely acceptable, so that we can establish a 
Scottish Assembly. 
Law, Rights and the Community 
The protection and enhancement of human rights and civil liberties is an 
indispensable part of a wider democracy. We will fight against crime and 
violence which affect all Western societies. We will continue to back the police 
with proper resources and manpower. The police are substantially better-paid and 
equipped today than they were under the Tories. At the same time, we shall 
attack the social deprivation which allows crime to flourish. 
Our policies on fighting deprivation and social injustice, on arresting the 
decay of our inner cities, on youth employment and helping the family, will all 
contribute to a happier and more law-abiding society. 
During the next Parliament, we will increase law centres providing legal help 
for the ordinary citizen; provide more resources for the prison and probation 
services; extend legal aid to certain tribunal hearings; bring together and 
coordinate the various offices of Ombudsmen; consider responsibility for the 
conduct of prosecutions in the light of the report of the Royal Commission on 
Criminal Procedures; and provide further help for the victims of crime. 
Democracy at Westminster 
In central government, we will: 
Make major improvements in the legislative process, including new methods of 
considering Bills in committee, and of scrutinizing the work of government 
through select committees. 
Establish a more powerful and professional system of audit. 
Introduce a Freedom of Information Bill to provide a system of open government, 
and enact the proposals made by the Government in its White Paper to reform 
Section Two of the Official Secrets Act. 
Bring forward proposals to reform the machinery of government and the structure 
of public administration to bring them into line with modern conditions. 
Reexamine the procedures for appointment to governmental and quasi-governmental 
bodies, and to the boards of public enterprises, and for recommendations for 
honours. 
No one can defend on any democratic grounds the House of Lords and the power and 
influence it exercises in our constitution. We propose, therefore, in the next 
Parliament, to abolish the delaying power and legislative veto of the House of 
Lords. 
Local Democracy 
Already, the central government pays 61 per cent of the cost of most local 
services. We shall continue through the rate support grant to provide national 
Exchequer assistance to ratepayers, particularly in areas of greatest need. We 
shall seek ways of making finance for local government fairer to ratepayers. 
Labour will extend public involvement in local government, so damaged by the 
bureaucratic and costly local government system imposed by the Tories. 
To this end, the Labour Government will: 
Give back to large district councils in England responsibility for education, 
planning, social services, local libraries and other local services. 
Equality for Women 
Labour's Sex Discrimination Act, Equal Pay Act, the Employment Protection Act, 
and 
Social Security Pensions Act have already created a new deal for women. 
Disabled housewives, single mothers, women looking after a dependent relative 
-all have received help from this Labour Government. 
We have made a start towards equal citizenship by giving to British women, 
married to foreign husbands, the same rights as British men with foreign wives. 
We have changed the regulations to make it possible for children born abroad to 
British mothers to acquire British nationality. 
We shall progressively eliminate the inequalities that still exist in the social 
security and tax systems. We shall introduce further reforms proposed by the 
Finer Committee on One-Parent Families. We have already protected the anonymity 
of women victims of rape. We shall bring in a fairer system of family law with 
new family courts. Labour will abolish the contributory conditions for maternity 
grant and raise the level of the grant. 
One community 
Labour has already strengthened the legislation protecting minorities. The next 
Labour 
Government will continue to protect the community against discrimination and 
racialism. We will: 
Give a strong lead, by promoting equality of opportunities at work throughout 
the public sector. 
Help those whose first language is not English. 
Monitor all Government and local authority services to ensure that minorities 
are receiving fair treatment. 
Consider what measures may be necessary to clarify the role of the Public Order 
Act and to strengthen and widen the scope of the Race Relations Act. 
Review the 1824 Vagrancy Act, with a view to the repeal of Section 4. 
Large-scale migration to this country is ending, but we still have some major 
commitments to fulfil. Labour will honour these. A quota would merely cause even 
longer delays for dependants. 
Our whole immigration and citizenship law needs revision. Progress has already 
been made on this with the publication of a Government Green Paper. 
Northern Ireland 
For over four years, Labour has governed Northern Ireland direct from 
Westminster. During this period, considerable progress has been made on the 
security front and on the efforts to bring peace and stability to the Province. 
Detention has been ended, a special independent Police Complaints Board has been 
set up, and the police themselves are now more widely accepted in the community. 

Unfortunately, in spite of all the attempts by the Labour Government, it has not 
been possible to find common agreement between the political parties on the best 
form of government for Northern Ireland. 
For the present, direct rule remains the only viable alternative. Any change can 
be made only with the consent of the people of Northern Ireland. We will work to 
make it more accountable and democratic. 
In the field of security, there is an essential role for the army in protecting 
the people of Northern Ireland, but we will continue our policy of extending the 
role of the police so as to involve all sections of the community. 
We accept the recommendations of the Bennett Committee, and we will see that 
they are carried out as quickly as possible to make ill-treatment impossible. 
Labour has saved thousands of jobs in Northern Ireland and attracted much 
investment and industry to the most under-developed areas. But at about twice 
the United Kingdom average, unemployment continues at an intolerably high level. 
The industrial policies set out earlier will be applied with full force and 
vigour to Northern Ireland. 
The Arts and the Media 
Both the arts and the media play an important role in enhancing the quality of 
our democracy. 
Arts. Aid to the Arts Council is going up 25 per cent this year. We will ensure 
more money for the Arts in future. The Arts Council should include elected 
representatives. 
A Labour Government will set up a British Film Authority, with a distribution 
arm to stimulate investment in British film productions. 
The media. Our aim is to safeguard freedom of expression; to encourage 
diversity; and to guard both against the dangers of government and of commercial 
control. 
On broadcasting, the Labour Government will implement the proposals in its White 
Paper, including instituting an Open Broadcasting Authority. We will phase out 
the television licence fee for old age pensioners during the lifetime of the 
next Parliament. 
Animal Welfare 
Under Labour's new council of animal welfare, we will have stronger control on 
the export of live animals for slaughter, and conditions of factory farming, and 
experiments on living animals. 
Legislation to end cruelty to animals will include the banning of hare coursing, 
stag and deer hunting. Angling and shooting will in no way be affected by our 
proposals. 
European Community 
At this election, Labour will, once again, be the only major political party to 
offer the British people the prospect of bringing about fundamental and 
much-needed reform to the EEC. 
We are concerned to ensure that Greece, Portugal, and Spain receive an early 
welcome into the Community. This enlargement of the Community will provide an 
opportunity to create a wider and looser grouping of European states, thus 
reducing the dangers of an over-centralised and over-bureaucratic EEC. 
We aim to develop a Europe which is democratic and socialist, and where the 
interests of the people are placed above the interests of national and 
multinational capitalist groups, but within which each country must be able to 
realize its own economic and social objectives, under the sovereignty of its own 
Parliament and people. 
A Labour Government will oppose any move towards turning the Community into a 
federation. 
Trade and Industry 
Working with our socialist colleagues, we will defend the ability of each member 
state to determine its own industrial policies. Our policy is to encourage such 
measures as import ceilings and orderly marketing arrangements where they are 
necessary to protect vital national economic interests. 
Member states must be able to control and plan their own energy policies while 
at the same time maximizing cooperation and seeking agreement on areas of mutual 
interest, such as research and development. 
Food and Agriculture 
Membership of the Community has compelled us to pay more for our food than 
otherwise would be the case. The CAP raises serious problems for British 
agriculture -distorting the balance of production; decreasing consumption 
through inflated prices in the shops; and stopping the industry from growing. 
That is why Labour seeks a fundamental reform of the CAP. 
The Tories back a policy which would raise food prices by the equivalent of £90 
a year on the average family budget. 
Labour will seek to: 
End the scandal of food surpluses - which cost £900m per year in storage alone. 
Improve access for cheap food from countries outside the EEC. 
Reduce EEC support prices; and press for more scope under the CAP for national 
support arrangements, such as our beef premiums. 
A change in emphasis from price support to structural reform. 
The reforms we are calling for are in the interests of consumers throughout 
every country in the Community. We will do our utmost to gain the cooperation of 
our EEC partners. However, if these reforms are not speedily implemented, we 
shall protect our interests - if necessary vetoing any further increase in food 
prices until surpluses have been eliminated. 
Economy and Finance 
We will retain the freedom to determine our own budgetary policy and to control 
our own currency. A Labour Government will retain the power to impose controls 
on capital movements and will continue to resist any upward harmonisation of VAT 
or any reduction in the existing range of zero-rated VAT items in Britain. A 
Labour Government would not join an economic and monetary union. 
The Community Budget 
Major reforms are needed to the Community Budget. Britain is now providing a net 
subsidy to some of the other EEC countries amounting to £900m a year. No country 
whose national income falls below the average for the Community as a whole 
should be required to make a net contribution to the Budget. 
We should reduce the proportion (75 per cent) of the Community Budget spent on 
agriculture, and the funds so released could be directed into social and 
regional development. 
The Labour Government will ensure that the Community Budget should promote a 
fairer distribution of resources within the EEC, and the convergence of economic 
performance of member states, to achieve faster growth, higher employment and 
lower rates of inflation. 
Parliamentary Sovereignty 
The Labour Government will legislate to ensure that British ministers are 
accountable to the House of Commons before making any commitment in the Council 
of Ministers. Enlargement of the Community will provide the opportunity for 
seeking changes in the Treaty of Rome, which would enable the House of Commons 
to strengthen its powers to amend or repeal EEC legislation. This would involve 
consequential amendments to the 1972 European Communities Act. 
The Third World 
The Labour Government will press for improvements in the Lome Convention, for 
widening the scope of the EEC's aid to include the most needy areas of the 
world, and for the EEC to place emphasis on trade and the stabilization of the 
export prices of third world commodities. 
Foreign Policy 
The Labour Party's priority is to build a democratic socialist society in 
Britain and to create the conditions necessary to free the world from poverty, 
inequality and war. We condemn violations of human rights wherever they occur 
and whatever the political complexion of the Government concerned, and will 
further human rights in all international organizations. 
Crucial to our policy is the pursuit of peace, development and disarmament by 
strengthening the process of détente. We shall seek to improve relations with 
the USSR and the countries of Eastern Europe, as well as with China. 
We shall continue to work for the peaceful and just settlement of disputes and 
the strengthening of international cooperation. The Labour Government will, 
therefore, continue its policy of strengthening international organizations, 
particularly the United Nations, and the Commonwealth. 
We shall continue to work to bring about a just settlement of the problems of 
Cyprus. 
We shall work for a negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Arab conflict which 
would ensure the right of all parties to achieve national self-determination and 
to live in a homeland within secure and recognized borders. 
Labour is totally opposed to the system of apartheid, and will continue to 
support opponents of apartheid, giving humanitarian and other aid to liberation 
movements of southern Africa. Labour believes that it is not only wrong, but 
contrary to British long-term interests, to be closely tied economically to 
South Africa. We will take active steps to reduce our economic dependence on 
South Africa and discourage new investment in South Africa by British companies. 
Those already operating there will be expected to comply with a strengthened 
code of conduct governing conditions of employment. 
We have refused to approve the Rhodesian internal settlement and we will 
continue to work for a settlement of the Rhodesia problem acceptable to the 
people of Rhodesia as a whole. Until such time as an agreement is arrived at, we 
will maintain and intensify sanctions against the illegal regime. 
We will continue actively to support the United Nations settlement proposals for 
Namibia, including upholding the territorial integrity of the country. 
In respect of those countries of Latin America with dictatorial regimes, 
particularly Chile and Argentina, the Labour Government will demand that these 
regimes pay promptly their due debts. The restoration of human and trade union 
rights will be a prior condition for the rescheduling of future debt payments. 
We will continue to pursue our policy of aid to the poorest countries and the 
poorest people, with the emphasis on rural development. Under Labour, aid is 
increasing at 6 per cent a year. 
We will seek to implement the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of the gross 
national product for official aid as soon as economic circumstances permit. 
Labour will take account of human rights considerations when giving aid. 
Help will continue to be given to the victims of repressive regimes, including 
the provision of refugee programmes. 
The Labour Government approach the North-South dialogue in a spirit of 
cooperation. It will actively participate in the UNCTAD 5 and other negotiations 
seeking to establish a more just world trading system which recognizes the needs 
of poorer countries. 
Détente and Defence 
While actively pursuing a policy of détente, the Labour Government will continue 
to press for the implementation of the human rights provisions of the Helsinki 
Final Act. The Labour Government will continue to work for the success of the 
Mutual Balanced Force Reduction Talks in Vienna, and will give full support to 
the work of the United Nations Committee on Disarmament. The Labour Government 
will work for the speedy conclusion of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. We shall 
also give every encouragement to our American allies to achieve a successful 
conclusion to the vital Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The Labour Government 
will maintain its support for Nato as an instrument of détente no less than of 
defence. The ultimate objective of a satisfactory relationship in Europe is the 
mutual and concurrent phasing-out of both Nato and the Warsaw Pact. 
We shall continue with our plans to reduce the proportion of the nation's 
resources devoted to defence, so that the burden we bear will be brought into 
line with that carried by our main allies. A Labour Government would plan to 
ensure that savings in military expenditure did not lead to unemployment for 
those working in the defence industries. We shall give material support and 
encouragement to plans for industrial conversion so that the valuable resources 
of the defence industries can be used for the production of socially-needed 
goods. 
In 1974, we renounced any intention of moving towards the production of a new 
generation of nuclear weapons or a successor to the Polaris nuclear force; we 
reiterate our belief that this is the best course for Britain. But many great 
issues affecting our allies and the world are involved, and a new round of 
strategic arms limitation negotiations will soon begin. We think it is essential 
that there must be a full and informed debate about these issues in the country 
before the necessary decision is taken. 
Labour will give every encouragement to those working for the cause of 
international peace. We will consider establishing a peace research institute. 
We shall negotiate with our friends and allies, to prevent the supply of arms to 
countries where any such supply would increase the chances of international 
conflict or internal repression. 
Into the Eighties 
This election comes at a time of change. unparalleled since 1945. A generation 
has now grown up in a welfare state which remains the envy of the world in 
health care and education. We have demonstrated a capacity for skill and 
inventiveness which keeps us at the forefront of world technology. Those are no 
mean achievements. 
A Tory Government would put all this at risk. At work, they would substitute 
confrontation for cooperation. The free market forces they support would mean 
soaring inflation, rising prices and growing unemployment. Their uncaring 
meanness would mean misery for millions of the most vulnerable in our community, 
for their policy of cutting public expenditure can only mean a drastic reduction 
in all our social services. 
Against this reactionary prospect, Labour sets its vision for the future. We 
seek to bring about a fundamental change in the balance of power and wealth in 
favour of working people and their families. We reject the concept that there is 
a choice to be made between a prosperous and efficient Britain and a caring and 
compassionate society. As democratic socialists, we believe they complement each 
other. 
That is the spirit of this manifesto. A strong, fair, and more just society is 
the prize within our grasp. It is the message of hope for the future, based on a 
record of promises kept, that Labour puts to the British people at this 
election. 

British Labour Party election manifesto, 1983The Labour Party: 1983 
The New Hope for Britain



Contents
Foreword
The years of Tory failure 
Emergency programme of action.
A five-year programme 
Ending mass unemployment 
How will we pay for it?
Working together 
An offensive against low pay 
Industrial democracy 
Safeguards for expansion 
A policy for imports 
Prices - controlling inflation 
Value for money 
Rebuilding our industry 
Public and co-operative enterprise 
Telecommunications 
Science and technology 
Finance for industry 
Employment and training 
Equal rights at work 
Energy 
Food, fishing and agriculture 
A better deal for women 
Fair shares 
Helping families 
A new deal for pensioners 
Help for the unemployed 
Help for people with disabilities 
A fairer benefit system 
The right to health care 
Personal social services 
Education for the future 
Schools in the community 
Post 16 education 
Adult education 
A new deal for young people 
Homes for everyone 
Council housing 
Home ownership 
Privately rented housing 
Help for all tenants
Construction 
Planning for people 
The inner cities 
The environment 
Rural areas 
Transport 
Law, order and justice 
Access to legal services 
The penal system 
Equal rights 
Nationality and immigration 
A wider democracy 
The security services 
Local democracy 
Local government finance 
Devolution to Scotland 
Northern Ireland 
Leisure for living 
The arts 
Sport and recreation 
The media 
Animal protection 
Britain and the Common Market 
The process of withdrawal 
The international dimension 
Disarmament - the international context..
Defence policy 
The Commonwealth and the developing world 
The Law of the Sea 
Near and Middle East 
Africa 
Latin America 
Falkland Islands 
Asia 
Human rights 


Foreword
Here you can read Labour's plan to do the things crying out to be done in our 
country today. 
To get Britain back to work. To rebuild our shattered industries. To get rid of 
the ever-growing dole queues. To protect and enlarge our National Health Service 
and our other great social services. To help stop the nuclear arms race. Here 
you can see what Labour is determined to do, and how we shall set about it. 
But at once the objection is raised: Can we afford it? Where will the money come 
from? Are we not just making promises which cannot be fulfilled? 
You will find the detailed answers here. But let us emphasise a few of them at 
once. 
The first short, sharp answer is that what Britain cannot afford is the present 
policy of accepting mass unemployment. 
Mass unemployment on the scale Mrs. Thatcher and her government have been 
prepared to tolerate - worse than we have ever known before and worse than any 
other industrial country has experienced - imposes a crushing burden on the 
whole community. 
Of course it hits hardest the young denied work altogether, and their mothers 
and fathers thrown out of their jobs with little chance of getting another. 
But it also hits the whole country. 
Mass unemployment costs the country &pound;15 billion, &pound;16 billion, 
&pound;17 billion a year, astronomic figures never conceived possible before, 
and they move higher still every month. 
Mass unemployment is the main reason why most families in Britain, all but the 
very rich, are paying more in taxes today than they did four years ago when the 
Conservatives promised to cut them for everybody. 
Mass unemployment is the main reason why we are wasting our precious North Sea 
oil riches. Since 1979 Mrs. Thatcher's government has had the benefit of 
&pound;20 billion in tax revenues from the North Sea. It has all been swallowed 
by the huge, mounting cost of mass unemployment. And the oil won't last for 
ever, although, according to Mrs. Thatcher's economics, the unemployment will. 
Our country, no civilised country, can afford the human waste, the industrial 
and economic waste, involved in these policies. We in the Labour Party reject 
them absolutely, and we describe in this Manifesto the real constructive 
alternative, and how we shall pay for it. 
See, first, our Emergency Programme of Action to be started immediately we are 
given the power. Most of these measures are designed to start the drive for 
expansion, and the cost of them has been added up. How fast can the country 
escape for the present stagnant rut? 
That is the real question. 
Just a week before Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Tory Chancellor, produced his last 
Budget to keep us in the rut, Peter Shore, Labour's Shadow Chancellor, produced 
his budget for expansion. 
The costs he set out - an &pound;11 billion expansion - would cover, as they 
were designed to cover, the items we have listed in the Emergency Programme, the 
promises we have tabulated. 
So little is it true that Labour has not counted the cost. No party in 
opposition has ever stated its intentions so clearly and comprehensively. 
Then what happens? What happens after the first expansion is launched? Here in 
these pages we describe the conditions for success, the pace we can move 
forward, how that will depend on the response we can secure from all sections of 
the community, on the partnership we have established with the trade unions. 
Without that continuing partnership to rebuild our country, all else will fail. 
True enough; but Labour is the only party which has worked for this partnership 
and pledges it for the future. 
And where will the money come from? Some of it will come from those oil revenues 
now pouring down the drain. Some of it will come from the billions we waste on 
the dole queues. Some of it will come from the billions now being allowed to be 
exported in investment abroad. 
Yes, and some of it will be borrowed, Mrs. Thatcher's dirty word. 
But borrowing in that sense is what every intelligent government since the war 
in Britain has done - including even Conservative governments. Borrowing in that 
sense is what has been done by other governments in this world slump who have 
kept their unemployment much lower than ours - and their inflation rates low 
too. 
Of course the slump can be beaten, if we have the will and the right policies. 
The European governments which have survived it best have been mostly socialist 
governments rejecting Thatcherite nostrums. And the whole wider experience of 
the Western world since 1945 proves what can be done when governments set before 
them full employment as a target. Is it truly realistic and practical to cast 
all that knowledge aside? 
It is just not true that mass unemployment must be accepted. 
Rather, if nothing can be done about unemployment, nothing truly enduring can be 
done about anything else. Allow it to persist and it will corrode the rest of 
our society. It will make more deeply endemic than ever the injustices, the 
bitter hardships, which afflict so many of our people. 
So let's put a stop to defeatism, and put a stop too to all those sermons about 
Victorian values. The labour movement - the Labour Party and the trade unions 
acting together - came into being, as one of our poets, Idris Davies, said, to 
end "the long Victorian night". It was a fight to introduce civilised standards 
into the world of ruthless, devil-take-the-hindmost individualism. 
Particularly after our 1945 victory, when Labour had a majority, we set to work 
creating a real community in which the strong would come to the aid of the weak, 
in which the profit test would have to make way for the human test. 
It was the Labour Party which created - to take just one example - the National 
Health Service, in the teeth of bitter Tory opposition. Labour will come to the 
rescue of that service and make it worthy of those who founded it, those who 
serve it, and the patients who need it most of all. It is a commonsense example 
of democratic socialism in action. 
Of course, we know that the full work of rebuilding will not be easy. Of course 
we know that, thanks to world conditions and the Conservative years of 
destruction and decay, our task is made much harder. 
But the programme of socialist reconstruction outlined in these pages, can be 
carried through if a Labour government commands the support of the other great 
democratic institutions in the land - in particular the local authorities and 
the trade unions. 
Labour is the only party which desires and can secure the working partnership 
between the government and the trade unions essential to national recovery. 
Above all, the new Labour government will play a much more ambitious part in 
helping to guide the nation towards peace, and, as an essential part of the 
process, in establishing a sensible defence policy for our country. 
One bunch of smears and scares with which Tory propagandists have already 
disfigured this election campaign suggests that the Labour Party proposes to 
throw away our defences, to abandon our alliances. 
It is just not true. And it should not be forgotten that one of the last acts of 
Mrs. Thatcher's government was to stop the debate in the House of Commons when 
these slanders could have been nailed. 
What we do propose to do is to get rid of the nuclear boomerangs which offer no 
genuine protection to our people but, first and foremost, to help stop the 
nuclear arms race which is the most dangerous threat to us all. 
One of the most wretched features of the present government's record has been 
the low interest they have devoted to the work of securing international 
disarmament. No British initiative of any significance in this field has been 
taken. 
Instead, the programme for establishing American-controlled Cruise missiles on 
our soil has been accepted without question, and the Trident programme for the 
expansion of the British-controlled nuclear forces has been accepted without 
reference to the possibilities of disarmament. 
Indeed, the logic of the case for the nuclear deterrent, presented by British 
Conservative Ministers, is that all peace-loving countries should equip 
themselves with the same protection. It is a logic which would intensify the 
race and destroy the universe. 
The first task of a new Labour government will be to restore a sense of sanity 
in dealing with these supreme questions. We offer a combined programme of action 
by this country and of action in association with other countries. 
We are the only party that offers such a programme to meet the scale of the 
challenge. We are the only party that offers a non-nuclear defence policy. 
But we are not alone in our plans and our aspirations. Multitudes of people in 
many other lands, on both sides of the Atlantic, in Asia and Africa and Europe 
too, are ready to join us in the campaign for a nuclear freeze, for fresh 
exertions to stop the proliferation of these weapons, to stop the whole 
monstrous nuclear race to destruction. 
Michael Foot 



In this campaign document we set out Labour's alternative to mass unemployment. 
We explain how a Labour government will help to stop the nuclear arms race. We 
provide a radical programme of action, for a full, five-year parliament, to save 
British industry and rebuild the welfare state.



The years of Tory failure
When the Tories took office in May 1979, unemployment was falling and the 
economy growing. Living standards had gone up by a sixth in two years, and North 
Sea oil held out the prospect of economic growth, high levels of employment and 
better social services. 
All this was thrown away by the Tories. Nearly three and a quarter million men 
and women are now out of work, even on the official count. Plant after plant 
forced to close. Manufacturing production down by a fifth. Investment cut by a 
third. Our domestic markets captured by imports of manufactured goods. 
After four years of Mrs. Thatcher, Britain is a poorer country. We have fared 
far worse than any other major industrial country. The unprecedented advantage 
of North Sea oil and gas - worth, in tax revenues alone, 8p in the pound on 
income tax - has been squandered, with nothing whatsoever to show for it. 
What have all these sacrifices achieved? Our economy today is weaker, not 
stronger, than in 1979. There is no prospect of real economic growth. Indeed, 
the Tories no longer dare to predict when unemployment will begin to fall. True 
enough, inflation, after being forced to record levels by the Tories, has been 
brought down. But look at the cost in jobs, in poorer housing, in living 
standards, and in lost opportunities for our youth. And now inflation is set to 
increase again, with interest rates and mortgage rates likely to rise too. 
The legacy of four Tory years goes beyond unemployment and industrial decline; 
beyond the damage done to our social services; beyond even the dangerous 
commitment to new nuclear weapons. It is expressed in the deep sense of 
bitterness, distrust and despair now felt among so many sections of the 
community. Our task will be to heal these wounds and rekindle among the British 
people a new sense of unity and common purpose. 



Emergency programme of action
Within days of taking office, Labour will begin to implement an emergency 
programme of action, to bring about a complete change of direction for Britain. 
Our priority will be to create jobs and give a new urgency to the struggle for 
peace. In many cases we will be able to act immediately. In others, which 
involve legislation, they will take longer to bring into effect. But in all 
cases we shall act swiftly and with determination. 
This is what we plan to do. We will: 
  Launch a massive programme for expansion. We will: 
    Provide a major increase in public investment, including transport, housing 
    and energy conservation. 
    Begin a huge programme of construction, so that we can start to build our 
    way out of the slump. 
    Halt the destruction of our social services and begin to rebuild them, by 
    providing a substantial increase in resources. 
    Increase investment in industry, especially in new technology - with public 
    enterprise taking the lead. And we will steer new industry and jobs to the 
    regions and the inner cities. 
    Ensure that the pound is competitive; and hold back prices through action on 
    VAT, rents, rates and fares. 
    Introduce a crash programme of employment and training, with new job 
    subsidies and allowances. 
  Begin to rebuild British industry, working within a new framework for planning 
  and industrial democracy. We will: 
    Agree a new national economic assessment, setting out the prospects for 
    growth in the economy. 
    Prepare a five-year national plan, in consultation with unions and 
    employers. Back up these steps with a new National Investment Bank, new 
    industrial powers, and a new Department for Economic and Industrial 
    Planning. 
    Repeal Tory legislation on industrial relations and make provision for 
    introducing industrial democracy. 
    Begin the return to public ownership of those public industries sold off by 
    the Tories. 
  Start to create a fairer Britain, with decent social services for all. We 
  will: 
    Raise child benefits by &pound;2 a week, and give special help to one-parent 
    families and families with disabled dependants. 
    Uprate the pension in November 1983 by the full amount needed to protect 
    against inflation; and increase pensions by &pound;1.45 a week for a single 
    person and &pound;2.25 for a married couple. 
    Provide more resources for the health service with an increase of at least 3 
    per cent a year in real terms. 
    Improve the personal social services, such as meals on wheels and home 
    helps, with an increase of at least 4 per cent a year in real terms. 
    Spend more on education, including on essential books and equipment; end the 
    assisted places scheme; and stop selection in secondary schools. 
    Begin to develop comprehensive care for the under-fives. 
    Begin to develop a strategy to eliminate low pay. 
  Introduce positive action programmes to promote women's rights and 
  opportunities, and appoint a cabinet minister to promote equality between the 
  sexes. We will: 
    Strengthen the Equal Pay Act and the Sex Discrimination Act. 
    Improve child care and other social services. 
    Take steps to end discrimination in education and training. 
    Reverse Tory cuts in maternity rights. 
    Increase the maternity grant. 
  Encourage and assist local authorities to begin a massive programme of 
  house-building and improvement, through an immediate 50 per cent increase in 
  their housing investment programmes. Priority will go to the urgent repair and 
  replacement of run-down estates. We will freeze all rents for the first full 
  year. 
  Begin a major programme to stop the waste of energy. We will stop Sizewell and 
  abandon the Tory PWR programme; and open urgent discussions, with the unions 
  and management in the coal industry, on a new Plan for Coal. 
  Give more help to public transport, with funds to improve services, keep down 
  fares, and increase investment - especially in rail electrification and better 
  freight facilities. Councils will be given new powers to support local 
  services. 
  Act to improve the environment and deal with pollution - including a ban on 
  lead in petrol. An urgent start will be made on improving our inner cities, 
  including action on derelict land and buildings. 
  Introduce a positive action programme for the ethnic minorities. We will also 
  introduce citizenship and immigration laws which do not discriminate against 
  either women or black and Asian Britons. 
  Give a new priority to open government at local and national levels, and give 
  local communities greater freedom to manage their own affairs. We will also 
  introduce an early Bill to abolish the legislative powers of the House of 
  Lords. 
  In international policy, we shall take new initiatives to promote peace and 
  development. We will: 
    Cancel the Trident programme, refuse to deploy Cruise missiles and begin 
    discussions for the removal of nuclear bases from Britain, which is to be 
    completed within the lifetime of the Labour government. 
    Ban arms sales to repressive regimes. 
    Increase aid to developing countries towards the UN target of 0.7 per cent. 
    Re-establish a separate Ministry of Overseas Development. 
    Take action to protect the status of refugees in Britain. 
  We will also open immediate negotiations with our EEC partners, and introduce 
  the necessary legislation, to prepare for Britain's withdrawal from the EEC, 
  to be completed well within the lifetime of the Labour government. 


A five-year programme 
Labour's emergency programme of action will get Britain on the road to recovery. 
But on its own it will not be enough to establish a fairer, more prosperous, 
more caring Britain. 
The programme we set out in the pages which follow is, therefore, for a full, 
five-year term of office. Clearly, we cannot do everything at once. The economy 
has been dangerously weakened by the Tories, and Britain is considerably poorer 
than when we were last in government. The world recession could hamper our plans 
for economic revival. 
Moreover, our proposals add up to a considerable increase in public spending. 
Our programme is thus heavily dependent upon the achievement of our basic 
objectives: namely, a large and sustained increase in the nation's output and 
income and a matching decline in the numbers out of work. It is this that will 
make the resources available for higher public spending programmes and cut the 
enormous cost of unemployment. Even so, some of our commitments will be phased 
in over a number of years. At each stage, clearly, we shall have to choose 
carefully our priorities. 
Ending mass unemployment 
The present hideous level of unemployment is not an accident It is the direct 
result of the policies of this government. The Tories have cut public investment 
and services, and increased taxes, taking spending power out of the economy and 
destroying jobs in both public and private sectors alike. They have forced up 
interest rates and kept the pound too high - a combination that has crippled 
British industry, and helped lose us markets at home and abroad. 
Our approach is different. We will expand the economy, by providing a strong and 
measured increase in spending. Spending money creates jobs. Money spent on 
railway electrification means jobs, not only in construction, but also in the 
industries that supply the equipment - as well as faster and better trains. If 
we increase pensions and child benefits, it means more spending power for the 
elderly and for parents, more bought in shops, more orders for goods, and more 
jobs in the factories. More spending means that the economy will begin to 
expand: and growth will provide the new wealth for higher wages and better 
living standards, the right climate for industry to invest, and more resources 
for the public services. 
Our central aim will be to reduce unemployment to below a million within five 
years of taking office. We recognise the enormous scale of this task. When we 
set this as our target, unemployment was 2.8 million, according to the official 
figures. On this basis it is now at least 3.2 million. Our target will thus be 
all the more difficult to achieve. It remains, however, the central objective of 
our economic policy. 
To achieve it we will need five years of economic growth, with a Labour 
government carrying through all of the industrial, financial and economic 
policies outlined here. But we will also work with other governments - 
especially socialist governments - to bring about a co-ordinated expansion of 
our economies. 
Economic expansion will make it possible to end the waste of mass unemployment. 
But it will also reduce the human costs of unemployment - the poverty, the 
broken homes, the increase in illness and suicides. And it will provide the 
resources we need to increase social spending, as we must, at least in line with 
the growth of the economy. 
How will we pay for it? 
Given our commitment to increase public spending, it is right that people should 
ask: how will we pay for it? 
It would be wrong to finance the initial boost to spending by increasing 
taxation. Only if ours was a fully employed economy would this be the right way 
of doing it. But our economy today is chronically under-employed. We have people 
out of work, idle plant, and unused savings. To finance expansion by increasing 
taxation in these circumstances would be wrong. For the increased spending in 
one part of the economy would be cancelled out by decreased expenditure 
elsewhere. Of course, once the economy gets much nearer to full employment, some 
taxes will have to be increased, both to shift the tax balance towards those who 
can best afford to pay, and to help finance our social programme. 
Like any other expanding industrial enterprise, we shall borrow to finance our 
programme of investment. This is better than borrowing, as the Tories are doing, 
in order to pay for the dole queue or to provide finance for the Argentine 
government to buy arms. 
There is no shortage of savings in the country available for borrowing today. 
Indeed, vast amounts of British money - more than the government's total 
borrowing requirement last year - are flowing into overseas investment. For with 
our present slump, there is not the demand for investment here. 
But the scale of borrowing will not be nearly as great as the increase in 
spending. Spending generates new income and new savings. As the economy recovers 
we shall be able to spend less on keeping people unemployed. And when people get 
jobs they will also pay income tax and spend more on goods which are taxed. Last 
year benefit payments, and tax revenues foregone - because of unemployment - 
cost the nation some &pound;17,000 million. There are also important savings to 
be made by cancelling the present government 5 massive expenditure programmes on 
Trident and on PWR nuclear reactors. 
Working together 
At the heart of our programme is Labour's new partnership with the trade unions. 
Our policies have been worked out with them. The Tories take pride in rejecting 
any chance of constructive co-operation with the trade unions. But it is the 
nation that has paid the price - the economy in ruins, and industrial relations 
a battlefield. We believe that there is a better way: to harness the goodwill 
and co-operation of working people and to work together to create a better life 
for all. 
Our starting point in government will be to discuss and agree with the trade 
unions a national economic assessment, as described in our joint statement with 
the TUC, Partners in Rebuilding Britain. This will set out the likely growth in 
the national output and how it could be shared. It will cover the allocation of 
resources, and the distribution of income between profits, earnings from 
employment, rents, social benefits and other incomes. It will also take into 
account our policies on the redistribution of income and wealth, not least 
through the reform of taxation. It will take a view on what changes in costs and 
prices would be compatible with our economic and social objectives, and help to 
ensure that our plan for expansion is not undermined by inflation. We will not, 
however, return to the old policies of government-imposed wage restraint. The 
assessment will thus play a crucial part in our national plan. 
The assessment will also play an important role in Labour's plans for the 
redistribution of wealth and power in our society. For, as we emphasise in 
Labour's Programme, our aim is nothing less than to bring about 'a fundamental 
and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth in favour of working 
people and their families'. 
An offensive against low pay 
The next Labour government will launch an offensive against low pay as part of 
our strategy for equality. The problem of low pay remains acute both in relative 
and absolute terms. If low pay at present is defined as less than two-thirds of 
average male manual earnings, there were 3 million full-time low-paid workers in 
1982, of whom over 2 million were women workers. Adding to these figures young 
workers, part-time workers and homeworkers produces a total in the region of 
almost 6 million - a great majority of whom are women. 
We will work together with the unions to tackle low pay and extend the concept 
of fair wages and arbitration. We will strengthen the Equal Pay Act. We strongly 
emphasise the principles of fairness and proper comparability, and will ensure 
machinery is available for the trade unions to establish these principles. We 
will also discuss with the TUC the possibility of introducing a minimum wage. 
Industrial democracy 
Industrial democracy is vital to the success of the national plan. We believe 
that working people must have clear and definite rights to a say in running 
their firms - and to an influence in economic planning. We will give new 
statutory rights to workers - through their trade unions - on information, 
consultation and representation within their companies. These are described in 
our joint statement with the TUC, Economic Planning and Industrial Democracy. 
But we will work out with the unions concerned what this means for the 
individual industries and firms. 
We will repeal the divisive Tory 'employment' laws and provide new statutory 
support for collective bargaining. We will also give proper employment 
protection to women and to homeworkers, part-time workers and temporary workers. 

The Tories' cut-backs in the work of the Health and Safety Commission will be 
reversed. Labour will actively support the commission and the role of joint 
safety committees in the work place. 
Safeguards for expansion 
Increased spending will not be enough to ensure sustained economic growth. 
Spending will not create jobs if it is soaked up by imports. We must not allow 
firms to use a return to growth as an excuse to put up prices. It will, in 
addition, be essential to co-ordinate expansion so proper investment is made for 
the future. 
First, we will see that our financial and monetary policies support expansion. 
We will make sure that public borrowing is financed, through the financial 
institutions and national savings, without disruptive or damaging changes in 
interest rates. 
Second, exchange controls - maintained by successive British governments since 
1939; and so foolishly scrapped by the Tories in 1979 - will be re-introduced. 
This will help to counter currency speculation and to make available - to 
industry and government in Britain - the large capital resources that are now 
flowing overseas. 
Third, we must ensure that our trade and balance of payments contribute to our 
expansion. This means maintaining the pound at a realistic and competitive rate. 
Tory monetary policies have kept interest rates far too high, pushing the pound 
beyond its competitive value. An overpriced pound taxes exports and subsidises 
imports. Our balance of trade, other than North Sea oil, has been seriously 
damaged as a result. A competitive exchange rate will assist British exports 
abroad and make British goods more competitive at home. 
A policy for imports 
But we must also plan ahead so that, as the economy expands, we keep our exports 
and imports in balance. We must therefore be ready to act on imports directly: 
first, in order to safeguard key industries that have been seriously put at risk 
by Tory policy; and second, so as to check the growth of imports should they 
threaten to outstrip our exports and thus our plan for expansion. We will: 
  Use agreed development plans, which we shall negotiate with the large 
  companies that dominate our economy, so as to influence their purchasing and 
  development policies. Our aim will be to prevent excessive import penetration 
  and promote our own exports. 
  Use public purchasing policy to help support our strategy. 
  Introduce back-up import controls, using tariffs and quotas, if these prove 
  necessary, to achieve our objective of trade balance - upon which sustained 
  expansion depends. 
Our purpose in trade policy is not to reduce trade but to make possible an 
orderly expansion of imports, paid for by our growing export trade. We will thus 
be able to replace the present policies of deflation, which restrict world 
trade, by policies of expansion, which increase world trade. We will also 
encourage international action for expansion and increased world trade. 
Within the framework of an orderly expansion of trade, we will also seek to give 
real preferences to imports from developing countries, particularly from the 
poorest countries, except where this will create acute problems for particular 
industries in this country. 
Prices - controlling inflation 
The Tories have used mass unemployment to control inflation. We completely 
reject this approach. We believe it is madness to keep people out of work 
deliberately. Our priority will be to expand the economy and create jobs. But we 
are also determined to prevent soaring prices. Expansion will in itself help cut 
the costs of production and therefore hold back prices. But we will use other 
measures to help restrain inflation. We will: 
  Use direct measures of price restraint, such as cutting VAT, and subsidies on 
  basic products, to cut into inflation as and when necessary. 
  Stop using public sector charges, such as gas prices - up by 116 per cent 
  since 1979 - as a back-door way of raising taxes, as the Tories have done. 
  Buy our food where it is cheaper, on world markets, following Britain's 
  withdrawal from the EEC. 
  Give powers to a new Price Commission to investigate companies, monitor price 
  increases and order price freezes and reductions. These controls will be 
  closely linked to our industrial planning, through agreed development plans 
  with the leading, price-setting firms. 
  Take full account of these measures in the national economic assessment, to be 
  agreed each year with the trade unions. The assessment will also take account 
  of the impact of cost increases on the future rate of inflation. 
Value for money 
The Tories say that 'competition' ensures that shoppers get a fair deal. The 
customers know better. Stronger legal safeguards are essential to protect 
customers - not least from shoddy goods. And shoppers must know their rights and 
be able to enforce them. We will undertake an urgent and comprehensive review of 
consumer law and reform it. We will also bring in new safeguards on advertising. 
We will: 
  Establish a major public service facility - a Product Research Unit - to test 
  products and manufacturers' claims about them, and to publicise the results 
  widely. 
  Set up consumer advice centres in all main shopping centres, with mobile units 
  for rural areas. 
  Provide simple court procedures for small claims, stronger trade codes of 
  practice placed on to a statutory basis, and adequate penalties for trading 
  offences. 
  See that all public enterprises give a high priority to dealing with consumer 
  complaints and needs - and back them with stronger consumer councils. 
  Introduce a code of advertising practice, on a statutory basis, to be 
  administered by the office of Fair Trading; and provide powers to order 
  advertisements to be substantiated, withdrawn, or corrected with equal 
  prominence. 
Rebuilding our industry 
The Tories have been a disaster for British industry. Plants and companies have 
closed, skilled workers have been laid off, markets at home and abroad have been 
lost to our competitors. Industry has not invested enough, and it has failed to 
develop and exploit the new technologies as successfully as other industrial 
countries. 
We must rebuild our industrial strength - and we can do so under a Labour 
Government working together with unions and managers, to plan Britain's 
industrial development. Our aim is not just to save companies and factories from 
closing down. We intend to create new companies and new science-based industries 
- using new public enterprise to lead the way, and supported by the development 
of industrial democracy. 
In our joint statement with the TUC, Economic Planning and Industrial Democracy, 
and in Labour's Programme 1982, we show how it can be done. We will: 
  Develop a new five-year national plan to coordinate expansion and public 
  spending with plans for individual industries and regions. We will create a 
  powerful new Department of Economic and Industrial Planning. 
  Involve the trade unions and management in planning at every level with a new, 
  tripartite National Planning Council. 
  Link planning at all levels firmly to a radical extension of industrial 
  democracy. New statutory rights will enable workers to draw up plans for their 
  own enterprises and sectors of industry, which we will seek to incorporate 
  into our strategy. 
  Make our planning flexible, so that it is able to respond quickly to changing 
  circumstances and take full account of changing needs and preferences. We are 
  opposed to any kind of rigid planning from the centre. But we will seek to 
  develop a firm sense of strategic direction. 
  Negotiate agreed development plans with all leading companies - national and 
  multinational, public and private - so that such companies play a constructive 
  role in supporting the national plan and our plans for individual regions and 
  sectors. 
  Support these agreed development plans with new industrial powers, including 
  discretionary price controls, financial support and access to credit; and take 
  powers to invest in individual companies, to purchase them outright or to 
  assume temporary control. 
  Monitor closely the activities of multinational companies, through a Foreign 
  Investment Unit. All UK-based multinationals will have to operate within 
  clearly laid-down guidelines. 
  Develop regional development plans, with plans also being drawn up at local 
  level by local authorities. Regional development agencies will be established, 
  extending our present commitment to a Northern Development Agency to other 
  English regions in need of them. These agencies will have similar powers and 
  resources to those in Scotland and Wales. We will also consider using new 
  regional job subsidies. 
  Strengthen the NEB, the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies, and the 
  Industrial Development Board in Northern Ireland. We will give them, and the 
  new development agencies, adequate resources for investment and acquisition. 
Public and co-operative enterprise 
We will use public and co-operative enterprise to support our planning and as a 
major source of technical innovation. We will: 
  Encourage and help existing public enterprises to expand and diversify. They 
  will be given far more freedom to raise funds on capital markets. 
  Return to public ownership the public assets and rights hived off by the 
  Tories, with compensation of no more than that received when the assets were 
  denationalised. We will establish a significant public stake in electronics, 
  pharmaceuticals, health equipment and building materials; and also in other 
  important sectors, as required in the national interest. 
  Give generous encouragement and help to worker co-operatives and local 
  enterprise boards. We will establish a Co-operative Investment Bank. The 
  development agencies and local authorities will be empowered to support and to 
  help establish co operatives and local enterprise boards. We will give new 
  rights to workers to convert their firms into co-operatives. 
Labour will also support key industries in the public sector. We will: 
  Prevent the further decline of both public and private sectors of the steel 
  industry so that the industry can, through planned investment, meet the rising 
  demand from economic expansion. We will retain the five major BSC plants and 
  see that a larger share of the home market is met from UK production. A major 
  public presence will also be established in the steel stock-holding industry. 
  Develop our aerospace industries. We will ensure that proper levels of 
  research, development and investment take place, and that the industries have 
  the capacity and skills needed to compete as equals in the world market. The 
  British Aerospace Corporation will be re-established as a major public 
  enterprise. 
  Support the shipbuilding industry, which is vital for a maritime nation such 
  as Britain, with interests in merchant shipping, the Navy, offshore oil and 
  gas resources and fishing. Labour will establish a maritime strategy embracing 
  both shipbuilding and shipping interests. We will re establish the British 
  Shipbuilding Corporation as a public sector company with a new financial basis 
  and adequate resources for investment. 
Telecommunications 
A national cable system will make possible a wide range of new 
telecommunications services, greater variety in the provision of television, and 
a major stimulus to British technology and industry. But it must be under firm 
public control. A publicly-owned British Telecommunications will thus be given 
the sole responsibility to create a national, broadband network (including 
Mercury, the new privately-owned telecommunications system for business), which 
integrates telecommunications and broadcasting. 
Science and technology 
Science and technology are essential to Britain's economic and social 
regeneration. The Tories have undermined research and development in the 
science-based research industries of the future. Cuts in higher education 
threaten our fundamental research. Industry devotes less to research and 
development than any other of our major industrial competitors. Defence accounts 
for over 80 per cent of government research funds in industry. 
The fall in output, together with the lack of planning and retraining, has meant 
that new technology has brought major job losses in some sectors. Only Labour 
can plan new technology to meet our commitment to full employment. We will: 
  Guarantee adequate funding for higher education, the research councils and 
  government research establishments. 
  Use the National Investment Bank to channel funds from the financial 
  institutions into long-term investment in new technology. 
  Work together with trade unions to plan an expansion of new technology, in 
  particular using it to aid a product-based recovery of the economy. New 
  technology agreements, for proper safeguards and retraining for the 
  work-force, will be extended. 
  Strengthen the links between research by higher education and industry to help 
  greater industrial innovation. 
  Increase technological literacy in schools and give boys and girls equal 
  opportunities to study science and technology. 
  Promote the supply of engineers and technicians, including women, to meet the 
  needs of industry and the community. 
  Ensure that research and development are directed towards society's needs, 
  with a reduction in the present high proportion of defence research. 
  Promote the development and use of new information and communication services 
  to support a wider democracy. 
Finance for industry 
It is essential that industry has the finance it needs to support our plans for 
increased investment. Our proposals are set out in full in our Conference 
statement, The Financial Institutions. We will: 
  Establish a National Investment Bank to put new resources from private 
  institutions and from the government - including North Sea oil revenues - on a 
  large scale into our industrial priorities. The bank will attract and channel 
  savings, by agreement, in a way that guarantees these savings and improves the 
  quality of investment in the UK. 
  Exercise, through the Bank of England, much closer direct control over bank 
  lending. Agreed development plans will be concluded with the banks and other 
  financial institutions. 
  Create a public bank operating through post offices, by merging the National 
  Girobank, National Savings Bank and the Paymaster General's Office. 
  Set up a Securities Commission to regulate the institutions and markets of the 
  City, including Lloyds, within a clear statutory framework. 
  Introduce a new Pension Schemes Act to strengthen members' rights in 
  occupational pension schemes, clarify the role of trustees, and give members a 
  right to equal representation, through their trade unions, on controlling 
  bodies of the schemes. 
  Set up a tripartite investment monitoring agency to advise trustees and 
  encourage improvements in investment practices and strategies. 
We expect the major clearing banks to co operate with us fully on these reforms, 
in the national interest. However, should they fail to do so, we shall stand 
ready to take one or more of them into public ownership. This will not in any 
way affect the integrity of customers' deposits. 
Employment and training 
The long-term unemployed - the men and women who have suffered most from the 
Tory onslaught - will benefit directly from economic expansion and our policies 
on regional development. But special measures are also needed. By the end of our 
first five years, our aim is that no-one will be out of work for more than a 
year without receiving an offer of a job or training place. 
We will act quickly to save jobs and stop the further destruction of industry. 
We will expand the schemes for compensating firms that avoid redundancy and 
provide temporary jobs for the long-term unemployed. We will widen the Job 
Release Scheme and offer employment subsidies to firms, linked to agreements 
with them to preserve and create jobs. We will also provide major increases in 
youth and adult training, with special provision for women, ethnic minorities 
and the disabled; and integrate a reformed Youth Training Scheme into our scheme 
for a two-year student-traineeship. 
Industry has been badly hit by the collapse of training under the Tories. 
Expansion must not be held back by shortages of skilled labour; and people 
without work must have the skills needed to take up the available jobs. We will: 

  Introduce a new statutory framework, linking adult training with initial 
  training. This will also place a statutory duty on employers to carry out 
  training and establish joint workplace training committees. Adequate funds 
  will be provided jointly by industry and government. 
  Give the Manpower Services Commission the authority and resources it needs to 
  do the job. The commission will develop its regional and local structures, 
  advise companies on their plans for manpower, and get advance notice of 
  redundancies. 
  Ensure that the MSC develops a national job centre network and reverses the 
  cutbacks in occupational guidance and help for disadvantaged job seekers. We 
  will take urgent steps to abolish private employment agencies. 
Working time in Britain, over the life time of individual workers, is among the 
highest in industrial countries. We will work through collective bargaining to 
reduce working time; and this will include more flexible working arrangements, 
more time off for study, longer holidays, earlier voluntary retirement with 
adequate pensions - with progress towards our aim of a common pension age of 60 
- and a 35 hour week. 
Equal rights at work 
Labour's aim is to create equal rights at work for women and to overcome the 
effects of past discrimination. We will: 
  Expand Positive Action Programmes to eliminate discrimination, change 
  employment practices and introduce special training schemes to equip women to 
  enter non-traditional areas of work. 
  Carry out these programmes throughout the public sector, ensure that 
  public-sector contracts include a commitment to positive action, and press 
  employers and unions to negotiate these programmes through joint equal 
  opportunities committees at the workplace. These proposals will be backed, if 
  necessary, by a statutory duty on employers. 
  Strengthen the Sex Discrimination and Equal Pay Acts to make them more 
  effective. We will shift the burden of proof from the complainant to the 
  alleged discriminator, incorporate the concept of indirect discrimination and 
  introduce the principle of equal pay for work of equal value. 
  End the distinction between part-time and full-time workers in terms of 
  rights, hourly pay-rates and conditions, and extend greater employment 
  protection to homeworkers and women on maternity leave. 
We also aim to create equality of opportunity and treatment for black workers, 
and similar positive action programmes will be carried through on their behalf. 
Energy 
Energy is vital to our future as an industrial nation. We will plan its supply 
and demand more carefully and save more of the energy we use. As outlined in 
Labour's Programme 1982, we will: 
  Ensure that everyone can afford adequate heat and light at home. 
  Give priority to the coal industry and the use of coal as a fuel. We will seek 
  to re-establish the tripartite machinery set up under Labour and prepare a new 
  Plan for Coal. We will also replace old plant with coal-fired stations. 
  Assist major towns and cities to set up combined heat and power schemes. 
  Begin a massive conservation programme, led by insulation for council housing, 
  and giving incentives to industry on agreed plans to save energy. The 
  programme will be managed by a new Energy Conservation Agency. 
  Greatly increase spending on the development of renewable sources. 
  Stop Sizewell and scrap the Tory PWR programme. The need for a continuing 
  nuclear programme based on the British AGR will be reassessed when we come to 
  office. 
  Re-establish the Energy Commission to advise on the preparation and annual 
  review of a comprehensive energy plan. 
  Transfer the whole of the National Nuclear Corporation to the public sector. 
Energy costs now represent a major part of family budgets. We will aim to reduce 
these costs, both by conservation and by introducing new fuel allowances. 
We will bring Britoil back into public ownership and combine it with BNOC to 
create a powerful national oil corporation with full powers to engage in all 
aspects of oil-related activities. We will restore to the new corporation a 
minimum 50 per cent stake in all fields discovered since 1975; and, in line with 
our objective to bring North Sea oil into public ownership and control, the 
public sector will have the dominant role in all future oil and gas exploration 
and development in the North Sea. We reaffirm our commitment to achieving full 
public control and ownership of British Petroleum, in order to make it an 
effective agent of a nationally directed oil policy. 
Food, fishing and agriculture 
Britain needs a food and agriculture policy much more in line with our needs - 
and this is one of the prime reasons for leaving the EEC. Instead of the 
inflated prices of the EEC's Common Agricultural Policy, we will support our 
agriculture through deficiency payments - coupled, where necessary, with limited 
intervention buying and direct income support. 
As we describe in Labour's Programme 1982, we will conduct an 'annual 
assessment' of the industry, after consultation with all those concerned. This 
will set the level of support given to the industry. Labour will also negotiate 
long-term supply agreements with agricultural producing nations; establish 
commodity agencies and support marketing co-operatives; and, where helpful, 
extend marketing boards to other sectors. 
Together with the trade unions we will work to close the gap between 
agricultural and industrial earnings, and replace the Agricultural Wages Board 
with a statutory joint industrial council. We will also act to improve farm 
safety, provide statutory support for workers' safety representatives, and end 
pay discrimination against women workers. 
We will give a new deal to the fishing industry. We will draw up a National 
Fisheries Plan so as to take full advantage of our withdrawal from the EEC. We 
will also provide public investment for the industry and improved conditions of 
employment - including safety conditions - and introduce a licensing system for 
registered fishing vessels and fishermen. 
We will end the de-rating of agricultural land. We will also defend the 
agricultural environment by giving a new priority to the effect on the 
environment of our agricultural policies. We will make all agricultural aid 
subject to environmental criteria and extend development controls to 
agriculture. 
We shall take tougher measures to control the use of pesticides and herbicides. 
We shall establish a body with statutory powers to supervise their use, and in 
particular we shall ban the use of 245-T. We shall strengthen controls on the 
use of additives in feedstuffs, and in food, and ensure better labelling. Our 
aim is to make it easier for new entrants, such as young farmers, to come into 
the industry and obtain a tenancy. We will do this with the help of a new Rural 
Land Authority, which will administer rural land already publicly-owned and 
begin to extend public ownership to tenanted land. 
For the forestry industry, we intend to reconstitute the Forestry Commission, as 
described in Labour's Programme 1982, so that it operates as an expanding public 
enterprise. The commission would cease to act as a spokesman for the private 
sector; and it will be expected to extend its activities to include the 
processing side of the industry. We will also seek to increase tree plantings. 
A better deal for women 
Labour's objective is to achieve equality between women and men. Over half the 
population are women; yet in our society, paid employment is seen as important 
while domestic skills - involving caring for children - do not enjoy their 
proper status. Women should have a genuine choice between staying at home to 
look after the family or going to work. Men and women should be able to share 
the rights and responsibilities of paid employment and domestic activities, so 
that job segregation within and outside the home is broken down. 
Tory attacks on women's rights and opportunities have more than doubled the 
numbers of unemployed women and destroyed services which women in particular 
depend upon. Labour will do more than reverse these policies. We will: 
  Expand current positive action programmes as well as introduce wide-ranging 
  new schemes in order to encourage women to train and apply for new job 
  opportunities, particularly in the area of new technology. 
  Provide equal pay for work of equal value by amending the Equal Pay Act; and 
  take action, together with the trade unions, against low pay. 
  Strengthen the Sex Discrimination Act to include direct and indirect 
  discrimination on the grounds of family status, and shift the burden of proof 
  from the complainant to the alleged discriminator. 
  Strengthen and expand the role of the Equal Opportunities Commission. 
  Restore and extend women's employment rights to include part-time and home 
  workers. 
  Reverse the Tory attack on employment, social services and maternity rights. 
  Improve the level of financial support to families with children and disabled 
  dependants. The household duties test will be abolished. Extra help will be 
  given to one-parent families. 
  Establish an integrated system of child care with priority for children in the 
  most deprived areas. Our aim will be to introduce, as soon as possible, a 
  statutory duty on local authorities to provide nursery education for all pre 
  school children whose parents wish it. 
  Take steps to end discrimination in education and training, as set out in 
  Labour's Programme 1982. 
  Provide the resources to make a major improvement in the personal social 
  services for the care of elderly, sick and disabled people. 
  Within the NHS, improve community services, extend preventive measures 
  including screening, and develop child health services. 
  Increase the maternity grant to at least &pound;100. 
  Provide fair treatment for widows. 
  Increase the death grant to at least &pound;200. 
  Work to establish equal treatment in tax and social security. 
  End VAT on sanitary protection. 
  Appoint a cabinet minister to promote equality between the sexes. 
  Review the whole question of divorce and maintenance. 
  Establish a fairer system of family law, and introduce Family Courts. 
  Give more support for victims of rape; and provide an urgent review of police 
  and court procedures in cases of rape and violence against women. 
  Improve ante-natal and maternity services, and respect the wishes of women in 
  childbirth. 
  Support the provision of family crisis centres and more refuges for battered 
  women. 
While continuing to defend and respect the absolute right of individual 
conscience, we will improve NHS facilities for family planning and abortion, 
including counselling and day-care; and we will remove barriers to the 
implementation of the existing right of choice for women in the termination of a 
pregnancy. 
Fair shares 
Our plan for expansion must be supported by measures to create a fairer Britain. 
We shall reform taxation so that the rich pay their full share and the tax 
burden on the lower paid is reduced. By progressively increasing the real value 
of the personal allowance, we will help the lower paid and those on average 
earnings. We intend also to bring down the starting point of the highest rates 
of tax, and to remove the present ceiling on earnings-related National Insurance 
contributions. 
In Labour's Programme 1982, we explain how we will reduce tax avoidance. This 
will include action on family trusts and investment income. We also intend to 
limit the open-ended availability to higher-rate tax payers of various tax 
reliefs. A determined attack will be mounted on illegal tax evasion. 
We shall also reform indirect taxation. We will extend zero-rating under VAT, 
with different rates for essentials and non-essentials. 
Capital taxes will be used to reduce the huge inequalities in inherited wealth. 
We shall reverse most of the Tories' concessions on capital transfer tax and 
introduce a new annual tax on net personal wealth, along the lines set out in 
Labour's Programme 1982. This will ensure that the richest 100,000 of the 
population make a fair and proper contribution to tax revenue. 
Helping families 
Labour will give families a better deal. Our first priority will be to help 
families with children in order to support them in the task of parenthood. The 
Tories refuse to accept the wide variety in the type and size of families. Their 
policies restrict choice for members of families - in particular they reduce the 
freedom of men and women to choose whether to work or to stay at home and look 
after their families. At the same time, Tory policy has trapped more and more 
families in poverty through a combination of means-tested benefits and a tax 
system which bites hardest on the lowest paid. 
We aim to recast the tax and benefit system, so as to redistribute resources to 
families with children. Our priority is child benefit. We will increase it by 
&pound;2.00 a week, make it index-linked, and subsequently improve it in real 
terms, as resources allow. In the longer term, we shall aim to raise child 
benefit to the level of child support given to those on long-term benefits. We 
shall also restore the rights to weekly payment of child benefit; increase the 
maternity grant to &pound;100; and give extra help to one-parent families. 
We shall continue to help family budgets throughout the parliament: 
  By increasing personal tax allowances - thus taking the poorest families out 
  of the tax net; 
  By making further increases in child benefit; 
  By extending and improving the Invalid Care Allowance for those who care for 
  disabled people. 
To help pay for these improvements we shall, over the lifetime of the 
parliament, phase out the married man's additional tax allowance for those under 
the age of retirement. Married couples with dependants will clearly benefit 
considerably from these changes - whilst the overall change for those without 
dependants, given the increases in personal allowance, will be small in any one 
year. However, we recognise that the loss of the allowance could cause financial 
difficulty for those couples where one of the spouses is not in work. We shall 
therefore consider how best to give support to these married couples where there 
are no dependants. Our aim is to end sex discrimination in taxation. We favour 
the principle of separate taxation and are examining how best to implement this. 

A new deal for pensioners 
We believe that elderly people, both today's pensioners as well as those who 
will benefit in future from Labour's pension scheme, should share as of right in 
our future prosperity. We shall: 
  Uprate the pension in November 1983 by the full amount necessary to protect 
  its real value against the rise in inflation to that date. 
  Increase pensions, as soon as practicable, by &pound;1.45 for a single person 
  and &pound;2.25 for a married couple. This is the amount pensioners have lost 
  through the Tories breaking the link between pensions and earnings. 
  Link pensions and average earnings, when these are rising faster than prices, 
  and extend this to all benefits. 
  Make progress towards our aim of a common pension age of 60. 
  Double the Christmas bonus to &pound;20. 
  Phase out the TV licence for pensioners, during the lifetime of the Labour 
  government. 
  Give women the additional tax allowance for the elderly - the age allowance - 
  at 60 instead of 65. 
  Increase the Death Grant to &pound;200 and extend it to cover all deaths. 
  Introduce a Pension Schemes Act that will more adequately protect occupational 
  pensions from the effects of inflation than they are at present; protect the 
  position of early leavers; and extend to members of schemes, rights to 
  participation and to greater information. 
  Introduce, in areas where more favourable concessionary travel on local 
  transport does not exist, a nationwide, off-peak, half-fares scheme for 
  pensioners. 
  Reform the harsh supplementary benefit rules introduced by the Tories. 
  Reduce energy costs, for pensioners, both through support for conservation and 
  by introducing new fuel allowances. 
Help for the unemployed 
Working people are entitled to a decent income when they lose their job through 
circumstances beyond their control. An improved earnings-related supplement will 
once again be paid during the first months of unemployment. We shall end the 
discrimination whereby the unemployed are not entitled to the long-term rate of 
supplementary benefit after a year. We shall also consider how best to improve 
unemployment benefit for the longer-term unemployed so that large-scale 
supplementation is not required. 
Help for people with disabilities 
The last Labour government established, for the first time, the basis for 
eliminating poverty among disabled people. We intend to build on this. We will: 
  Introduce a &pound;10 a week blindness allowance, as a first step towards the 
  introduction of a new cash benefit for disabled people, which will vary 
  according to the degree of disability. 
  Bring up the non-contributory invalidity pension to the level of the flat-rate 
  contributory invalidity benefit, and restore the 5 per cent cut in invalidity 
  benefit. 
  Help the many disabled people who are capable of working part-time or for 
  limited periods, but discouraged by present benefit regulations. We shall 
  amend these to take account of their needs. 
  Abolish the household duties test for housewives' non-contributory invalidity 
  pension and extend invalid care allowance to all those women presently 
  excluded. 
  Continue to pay mobility allowance to existing recipients as they reach the 
  age of 75. 
  Ensure the full implementation of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons 
  Act. 
  For those who require long-term care - elderly, mentally handicapped, mentally 
  ill and disabled people - develop services within both the health service and 
  the local authority services, based on support for them and their families 
  within the community. 
  Make proper provision for the 20 per cent of children requiring various forms 
  of special education. We will promote and provide the resources for the 
  integration within mainstream schooling of those children whose needs are best 
  met by ordinary schools. 
Labour will also aim to overcome discrimination against the disabled at work. We 
will reverse the Tory cuts, which have caused unnecessary suffering for people 
with disabilities. We shall increase the number of disablement resettlement 
officers; extend capital grants to adapt employer's premises; strengthen 
existing schemes - especially rehabilitation - to help disabled people back to 
work; and introduce new legislation, including quotas, to secure employment 
opportunities and job protection for disabled people. 
A fairer benefit system 
The new supplementary benefit scheme introduced by the Tories is harsh and 
unfair. We shall reform it. The families of those involved in industrial 
disputes will be entitled to full benefits - less any strike pay actually paid. 
We shall return to a sliding scale for assessing capital and the surrender value 
of insurance policies will be excluded. The anomaly which prevents some widows 
from claiming long-term supplementary benefit will be removed. We shall give 
extra help to families with children. 
We shall improve staffing levels and physical conditions in social security 
offices so as to provide a more humane and responsive service for claimants. 
Many people fail to claim benefit to which they are entitled. We shall aim to 
increase take-up by improvements in publicity and the provision of advice. 
All the social security changes made by the Tories, including the new sick pay 
and housing benefit schemes, will be reviewed. If they do not treat working 
people and their families fairly, we will replace them. 
Forty years have elapsed since the Beveridge Report which led to the setting up 
of the National Insurance scheme by the post war Labour government. We shall 
conduct a thorough review of the scheme in the light of today's circumstances. 
The right to health care 
The creation of the National Health Service is one of the greatest achievements 
of the Labour Party. It now faces a double threat from the Tories: a lack of 
resources for decent health care; and the active encouragement of private 
practice. Labour will act to defend the basic principles of the service. We will 
ensure that it is free at the point of use and funded out of taxation, and that 
priority depends on medical need not ability to pay. 
To meet rising costs due to improved medical technology and the age composition 
of the population, and to allow for a general expansion of our under-funded 
health services, we shall increase health service expenditure by 3 per cent per 
annum in real terms. We will also seek a fairer distribution of these resources 
at both regional and district level. Since the election, prescription charges 
have increased from 20p to &pound;1.40 per item. Labour will phase out health 
charges. We shall also ensure that NHS staff receive a fair reward for their 
work and dedication; and we will discuss with the TUC new arrangements for pay 
determination and the resolution of disputes. 
Our overriding aim will be to reduce inequalities in standards of health care 
for all who need it. We will: 
  Give greater emphasis to prevention, both within the health and personal 
  social services. We will come forward with proposals to help prevent accidents 
  and disease, including action on advertising. 
  Give priority to improving our primary health care services, especially in the 
  inner cities. 
  Continue to improve the ante-natal and maternity services and develop our 
  child health services; and we will respect the wishes of women in child birth. 

  Introduce an independent complaints system in both hospital and family 
  practitioner services. 
  Recognise the importance of community health councils and ensure that they 
  have the power and facilities to represent fully the consumer point of view. 
  Abolish the special charges for overseas visitors, and end passport checks. 
  Take a major public stake in the pharmaceutical industry - and ensure that the 
  drugs available are safe, effective and economic. 
The present expansion in private medicine is a serious threat to our priorities 
in health care. We will not allow the development of a two-tier health service, 
where the rich can jump the queue. We shall remove private practice from the NHS 
and take into the NHS those parts of the profit-making private sector which can 
be put to good use. We shall also stop public subsidies to the private sector 
and prevent it expanding further. We will give proper recognition to those 
consultants who make a full-time commitment to the NHS; and we will provide 
incentives to those choosing to work in under-doctored areas and specialities. 
While continuing to defend and respect the absolute right of individual 
conscience, we will improve NHS facilities for family planning and abortion, 
including counselling and day-care; and we will remove barriers to the 
implementation of the existing right of choice for women in the termination of a 
pregnancy. 
Personal social services 
Personal social services - such as childcare, home helps, meals on wheels and 
residential and day care for the elderly and handicapped, are a vital part of 
our welfare state. And it is those who are most vulnerable in our society who 
depend most upon them. 
The Tory cuts in the social services have hit women hardest. They have meant 
lost jobs for many women and a loss of support for the elderly and disabled, 
thus forcing women to stay at home as unpaid carers. A major improvement in 
personal social services will be necessary, not only to raise the standard of 
living of those who depend upon them, but also to give women an equal right to 
work. Labour will reverse the Tory cuts, improve and expand services so that 
they can complement the much better community health services we shall provide. 
This will involve increasing spending by at least 4 per cent a year in real 
terms. We will: 
  Increase joint finance and extend it to cover other agencies. 
  Require social services departments to plan and develop services for children 
  jointly with education and health authorities. 
  Strengthen the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act so that it provides a 
  Charter of Rights for disabled people everywhere. 
  Require local authorities to develop preventive services for children at risk. 

  Give greater attention to the needs of ethnic minorities. 
  Encourage the growth of local, independent advice and advocacy services. 
Education for the future 
If individuals are to achieve their full creative potential, and our society is 
to advance, we must substantially improve educational provision and opportunity. 
The Tories' cuts have shown that they have no commitment to a free and fair 
education system. The fact is, however, that economic and social progress will 
depend on our success in making use of the abilities of the whole of our 
population. 
For the under-fives, our goal is to achieve comprehensive provision, with 
priorities for children in the most deprived areas. We will unify education and 
care services for the under-fives, both nationally and locally. Our aim will be 
to introduce a statutory duty on local authorities to provide nursery education, 
as soon as possible, for all pre-school children whose parents wish it. 
Schools in the community 
Primary education is fundamental to all educational and social development, as 
any parent knows. We will restore funds to local education authorities to reduce 
class sizes; and improve learning materials and facilities in primary schools so 
that our children receive the best possible start in their schooling. 
Secondary education is a period during which all young people must prepare 
themselves as the workers and citizens of the future. We shall encourage a 
higher standard of achievement among all pupils in the variety of academic and 
other activities which are essential parts of fully comprehensive education. We 
will: 
  Repeal the Education Act 1979 and prohibit all forms of academic selection, 
  such as the eleven plus, as a condition of admission to secondary schools. 
  Require local education authorities to maintain a broad, balanced and 
  comprehensive curriculum, providing genuinely equal opportunities for boys and 
  girls, and for the ethnic minorities to meet the needs of our multi-cultural 
  society. 
  Establish a common system of assessment for all 16 year olds which will 
  encourage effort and accurately record achievement at school. 
Throughout the whole of schooling, we will: 
  Determine a supply of appropriately qualified teachers to reduce class sizes. 
  No class size should be over 30. The quality and frequency of teacher 
  in-service training must be improved so that teachers receive no less than one 
  school term of training in every five years of service. 
  Discuss with the local authorities ways of developing a reformed system for 
  funding education. Whilst safeguarding local democracy in education, this must 
  secure and maintain improved national standards of provision in essential 
  areas. 
  Abolish corporal punishment; and help local authorities and schools to develop 
  other methods, already successfully practised in many schools, for dealing 
  with bad behaviour. 
  Positively encourage parental understanding and participation in the education 
  of their children by increasing parental representation on school governing 
  bodies and increasing the links between home and school. 
  Re-establish the school meals and milk services, cut back by the Tories. This 
  will help to offset the inequalities, for example in nutrition, highlighted by 
  the Black Report. 
Private schools are a major obstacle to a free and fair education system, able 
to serve the needs of the whole community. We will abolish the Assisted Places 
Scheme and local authority place buying; and we will phase out, as quickly as 
possible, boarding allowances paid to government personnel for their children to 
attend private schools, whilst ensuring secure accommodation for children 
needing residential education. 
We shall also withdraw charitable status from private schools and all their 
other public subsidies and tax privileges. We will also charge VAT on the fees 
paid to such schools; phase out fee charging; and integrate private schools 
within the local authority sector where necessary. Special schools for 
handicapped pupils will retain all current support and tax advantages. 
Post 16 education 
For 16 and 17 year olds, we will introduce a two years' student-traineeship 
within a third or 'tertiary', stage of education, as described in the section on 
young people. A 'tertiary awards council' will be established to develop and 
validate a proper system of educational assessment for the whole of the age 
group. Our aim is to replace the rigid 'A' level system with a broader programme 
of study within the student-traineeship, thus preventing over specialisation and 
promoting flexibility and breadth in learning. 
Our policy for education after eighteen is expansion with change. We will 
reverse the Tory cuts and restore the right for all qualified young people 
seeking higher education to secure places. We will also substantially expand 
opportunities for adults in both further and higher education. 
We reject the Tory proposals for student loans; and we will ensure students are 
given adequate financial support. We will also provide proper financial support 
for those on non-advanced, part-time advanced, and Open University courses. 
Adult education 
We are determined to give priority to adults who have been denied educational 
opportunity on leaving school. We will: 
  Give statutory backing to paid educational leave for workers. 
  Phase in a new, adult educational entitlement that will provide one year of 
  education, backed by financial support for adults who have never received 
  education after eighteen. 
  Require educational institutions to be more flexible in their admissions 
  procedures and methods of study. 
  Establish a proper legal basis for adult education; and create a development 
  council to promote adult and continuing education. 
  Establish machinery to plan and co ordinate all post 18-education together and 
  ensure that the bodies funding universities, and planning local authority 
  further, higher and continuing education, are more accountable and 
  representative. 
A new deal for young people 
Labour will end the scourge of youth unemployment and prepare young people to 
take up the jobs that we will create. We will also encourage all young people in 
employment to join a trade union. Our radical new scheme for young people will 
establish a new, two year student-traineeship for all 16 and 17 year olds. It 
will bring together, for the first time, the first years of apprenticeships, 
other training schemes for young workers and the young unemployed and courses in 
full-time education in schools and colleges. We will: 
  Give to young people who are at work the right to be released to college or 
  school, on full pay. Employers will be given a statutory duty to provide 
  opportunities for their young employees to receive systematic education and 
  training and to release student-trainees at their request. Premiums will be 
  paid to them to recruit young people and provide them with such opportunities. 

  Abolish the so-called Young Workers' Scheme, set up by the Tories to reduce 
  youth wages. Labour rejects completely the Tory argument that young people 
  have priced themselves out of jobs. 
  Offer all young people without work a place on new youth training schemes, 
  with proper education and training opportunities - which can best be 
  guaranteed by active monitoring by the trade unions; and give them an 
  allowance of at least &pound;30 per week - the level of which will be agreed 
  annually with the TUC - with trade unions being free to negotiate better 
  terms. 
  Provide student-trainees, in full-time education, with an educational 
  maintenance allowance of &pound;25 a week, at 1983 prices, covering 52 weeks 
  in a year. 
Labour will establish new rights and provide more resources for youth. We will: 
  Expand and improve the youth service so that it meets the social, cultural and 
  recreational needs of young people - especially the unemployed, young women, 
  the ethnic minorities and the young disabled. 
  Established a 'youth initiatives fund' to give greater recognition and support 
  to organisations which represent young people's interest. 
  Encourage local authorities to support representative local youth councils as 
  one of the means of enabling young people to influence public affairs as young 
  adults. 
  Expand funding and staffing for the provision of social studies and education 
  for citizenship in youth clubs and schools with the aim of informing young 
  people of their civil, political and trade union rights and responsibilities 
  as citizens. Accredited trade union representatives should be involved with 
  secondary school students in the context of such education, with full 
  facilities for such representatives at all career days. 
Homes for everyone 
Britain faces a major housing crisis. The Tories have slashed public spending on 
housing by half and house building is at its lowest since the 1920's. Houses are 
falling into disrepair faster than they can be repaired, while homelessness and 
waiting lists continue to grow. Labour will reverse this decline. Our aim is a 
decent home for all with real freedom of choice between renting and owning, on 
terms people can afford. 
Labour governments have done more than any others to assist owner occupiers; and 
we will extend this by giving special assistance to first-time buyers and 
council tenants. 
Labour will immediately increase by half the total housing investment programmes 
for local authorities. This will be a first step in increasing resources for 
council housing repairs and improvements and for new public sector house 
building. We will also give a new priority to getting empty council owned 
housing back into use. We will overhaul and extend the renovation grant and area 
improvement programme to tackle properly the decay of our older houses. New and 
better housing and environmental standards will be developed and greater 
provision will be made for hitherto neglected groups, such as single people. 
Council housing 
The Tories have forced council rents to more than double. The number of council 
homes for rent is falling because of the rundown of new building and enforced 
sales. Thousands have to cope with leaking roofs and damp, inadequate heating, 
broken down lifts, noise, lack of security, increasing disrepair and neglect. 
Labour will give council tenants a new deal. In addition to a freeze on rents 
for a full year, and the restoration of subsidies, Labour will: 
  fund a national action programme to repair and improve or replace run-down 
  estates, especially the system-built developments in which so many defects 
  have been revealed. 
  Strengthen tenants' rights on security, repairs and improvements, access to 
  files, exchanges, transfers, moves between local authority areas, and 
  rehousing rights on breakdown of relationship; 
  Encourage more responsive and decentralised housing management and 
  maintenance, and promote tenant participation and democracy, including housing 
  co-operatives; 
  End all residential and other qualifications, which unfairly exclude people 
  from council housing in the area where they live, extend the 'priority' groups 
  under the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act and strengthen the rights of homeless 
  people; 
  End enforced council house sales, empower public landlords to repurchase homes 
  sold under the Tories on first resale and provide that future voluntary agreed 
  sales will be at market value. 
Home ownership 
Labour believes in real home ownership at prices people can afford. Under the 
Tories the mortgage rate reached its highest ever level at 15 per cent and is 
still at 10 per cent. They have done little to help low income groups become 
owners. 
We support financial assistance for owner-occupation and will maintain mortgage 
tax relief for existing house purchasers at the current rate. The unfairness of 
mortgage tax relief above the basic rate, which gives most benefit to the 
highest incomes, will be phased out. We will also examine the possibility of a 
new and substantial form of financial help for first time buyers, with special 
consideration for council and new town tenants, aimed at easing the heavy 
initial burdens of house purchase. 
Labour will act to help home-owners. We will: 
  Simplify and reduce the cost of house purchase, ending the solicitors' 
  conveyancing monopoly, and require full disclosure of mortgage lending terms 
  and practices; 
  Make it easier for lower income groups to borrow funds on secure terms by 
  greatly expanding council mortgage lending and providing the funds needed. 
  This will be financed primarily by on-lending from the building societies, at 
  least 10 per cent of whose funds should be made available in this way; 
  Allow and encourage councils to provide a unified house-purchase service, 
  including estate agency, surveying, conveyancing and mortgage lending; 
  End the leasehold system for houses, strengthen the rights of leaseholders of 
  flats and increase protection to mobile home residents. 
Privately rented housing 
The worst housing conditions are in privately rented housing. The Tories have 
loosened the controls on rents and security of tenure and pushed up rents. If 
they get the chance, they would abolish all controls. 
Labour will ensure that tenants are fully protected. We will: 
  Actively encourage the transfer of all property owned by absentee private 
  landlords to the public or owner-occupied sectors, with local authorities 
  setting the pace. This will not apply to owner-occupiers letting all or part 
  of their home. 
  Repeal the Tories' shorthold scheme and close other loopholes in security of 
  tenure; and strengthen tenants' rights on deposits and harassment. 
  Strengthen councils' powers to enforce repairs and improvements and the 
  standards of management, particularly in multi-occupied properties; and launch 
  a programme of action against property held empty without justification. 
  Bring forward measures to strengthen tied tenants' rights and improve their 
  access to secure housing when they leave their job. 
  Bring service charges for private tenants and leaseholders within the fair 
  rents scheme. 
Help for all tenants 
Tenants in both the public and private sectors are plagued with difficulties 
caused by all-too frequent failure of landlords to carry out repairs 
satisfactorily and speedily. Tenants recognise that major structural repairs, 
for example to blocks of flats or maisonettes, can only be dealt with by 
large-scale improvement projects. But they rightly see no reason why routine 
repairs should be neglected. Labour will launch a new initiative aimed at 
tackling this troublesome problem. 
We will introduce a right to repair for all tenants - council, new town, housing 
associations and private landlord. This will give tenants the right to force 
landlords, including councils, to get routine repairs done, with landlords 
footing the cost. Where there are council direct labour organisations, these 
will be responsible for doing this work. Major structural work will not be 
included, but the Labour government will assist councils to carry out such work 
through much larger capital investment allocations and reinstatement of an 
adequate housing subsidy system. 
We also intend to reform the system of housing benefits for low income groups. A 
new Housing Tribunal will be established to replace the present confusing jumble 
of courts, tribunals and committees, as an accessible means of resolving 
landlord-tenant disputes. 
Construction 
The Tory recession has seriously damaged the construction industry. Company 
after company has gone bankrupt. Nearly 400,000 construction workers are on the 
dole. Labour's plan for expansion will help the industry back to its feet. But 
we will also introduce changes to the industry, as described in Labour's 
Programme, 1982 - not least to help stabilise the industry's workload. We will 
also provide greater job security for employees; and we will work out, with the 
agreement of the trade unions, a system of decasualisation. 
We also believe that a major new role should be played in the industry by public 
and co-operative enterprise - to provide a new source of enterprise, initiative 
and innovation. We will establish a new, publicly-owned company, as a major 
pace-making public enterprise, for large and medium-sized construction projects. 
In addition, to help protect the public interest, we will extend public 
ownership into the building materials industry, in which a small number of large 
companies now enjoy near monopoly conditions. 
We will also give generous and active support to the development of workers' co 
operatives, especially at the jobbing' end of the industry. We will reverse Tory 
policies towards local authority direct labour organisations. We will give them 
more scope by allowing them to compete for other work in their locality, while 
ensuring that they are efficiently run as municipal enterprises. We will oppose 
the contracting out of government services to privately-owned companies. 
Planning for people 
The way we plan the use of our land affects every one of us. It determines where 
we build our housing, the kind of shopping centres which are available, and 
where new jobs and factories are sited. We are determined to strengthen local 
planning and ensure greater participation by ordinary people over the decisions 
which affect their lives. 
The Tories have always put the interests of property developers before the needs 
of local people. Labour will change this. We will ensure that local authorities 
are able to decide on the positive use of land in their areas instead of having 
to respond to the initiatives of developers. And we shall take explicit powers 
to link land-use planning firmly with the economic and social planning of local 
authorities. 
A key issue in planning at local level is the ownership and use of land. We are 
determined to stop land speculation and make sensible and comprehensive planning 
possible. We will establish new land authorities, similar to the successful Land 
Authority of Wales, with the powers and funds needed to acquire development land 
- at its current use value - so that local plans can be fulfilled. Our proposals 
do not apply to owner-occupiers, whose homes and gardens will be safeguarded. 
We intend also to widen democratic participation in the planning system by: 
  Codifying and extending public rights of consultation, and of appeal against 
  planning decisions; 
  Improving access to public planning inquiries and broadening their terms of 
  reference; 
  Ensuring that, before the inquiry stage of certain major development 
  proposals, the environmental effects are subject to detailed analysis and the 
  report is published; 
  Creating a new fund to help objectors at major public inquiries, with an 
  independent board to decide who should be helped and by how much. 
The inner cities 
The decay, squalor and level of unemployment in our inner cities are a national 
disgrace. Labour is determined to reverse their decline. We will provide more 
resources, more investment and more jobs. We will act to ensure, through the 
policies set out in this campaign document, that people living in the inner 
cities have access to decent homes, health and education - and that there is 
proper accountability for the police.
In addition to providing a major increase of funds for the Urban Programme, we 
will: 
  Use agreed development plans, negotiated at national level with major firms - 
  public and private - to locate investment and jobs in the inner cities. 
  Use regional development agencies to prepare sites, encourage municipal and 
  co-operative enterprise, and help improve transport and other facilities. 
  Get local authorities to prepare local economic and social plans. We will also 
  support the development of well-financed local enterprise boards in areas 
  which need them - and enable local authorities to conclude agreed development 
  plans with small and medium-sized local firms. 
The environment 
Labour believes that the countryside should be preserved and enhanced as a 
source of recreation for town and country dwellers alike and as a habitat for 
wild creatures and plants. Everyone has a right to a decent living and working 
environment. 
We intend to monitor closely - and publicly - the nation's progress in improving 
the environment. We shall therefore present to parliament each year a major 
report on the 'State of the Environment'. We will also safeguard our heritage 
by: 
  Supporting rights of access to common land. We will stop landed interests from 
  preventing access for anglers; 
  Strengthening the planning laws to ensure that the countryside is protected 
  from damaging development; 
  Strengthening the legislation which protects endangered species; 
  Providing increased resources so that the Nature Conservancy Council and 
  Countryside Commission can function effectively; 
  Enacting a new Wildlife and Countryside Act and providing proper protection 
  for sites of special scientific interests.
  We will also act to curb pollution. We will: 
  Proceed with the implementation of the 1974 Control of Pollution Act. 
  Undertake a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of the present machinery 
  and powers on pollution control. 
  Eliminate lead in petrol by setting a date after which all new cars will be 
  required to use only lead-free petrol. The interests of motorists will be 
  safeguarded. 
  Restore those environmental agencies abolished by the Tories with a 
  responsibility for monitoring air and noise pollution. 
  Develop a programme for eliminating toxic substances from our living and 
  working environments. 
We will reform the water industry by repealing the Tories' Water Act and 
restoring democratic accountability in the industry. We will re-establish a 
national authority charged with responsibility for the strategic planning and 
use of all water resources. The canal system will be brought under a new 
national authority, so that it can be developed and maintained as an essential 
water resource. We will also consider how best to provide help, for those on low 
incomes, with paying their water rates. 
Rural areas 
Tory policies have seriously harmed the rural areas. Bus services have 
disappeared. Rail links are under threat. Jobs have been axed. Houses are not 
being built. Village halls and sub-post offices have been closed. Labour will 
act to improve the quality of life in the rural areas; and we have outlined our 
plans in Labour's Programme 1982 and in our statement Out of Town, Out of Mind. 
We will give greater priority to rural problems. And ministers will be expected 
to bring about greater co-ordination in promoting our policies. We will: 
  Ensure that the Development Commission, and its counterparts in Scotland and 
  Wales, become actively involved in implementing our policies for rural 
  regeneration. 
  Take measures to increase employment by encouraging the expansion of light 
  industry and tourism in the rural areas, while safeguarding the rural nature 
  of the countryside. 
  Improve the rural public transport network by a major injection of public 
  funds and a better use of existing resources. 
  Wherever possible retain village schools and generally improve educational 
  provision for all age groups; and introduce mobile health clinics and mobile 
  'all purpose' community services offices. 
  Take extensive measures to expand the provision of all types of housing in the 
  rural areas, which will also help to deal with the 'Second Home' problem. 
Transport 
Four years of Tory government has meant serious damage to Britain's transport 
system. Profitable elements have been sold off. Important but unprofitable 
sections left in public hands are being starved of investment. The quality of 
public transport services has fallen disastrously. 
Another Tory government would mean even poorer services, higher fares and lower 
safety standards. Labour repudiates this whole approach. We believe that the 
improvement of public transport must be a major social priority, which can only 
be achieved by a sensibly integrated transport system. We describe our proposals 
in Labour's Programme 1982. 
We will maintain and improve the rail network, invest in the electrification of 
the main lines and replace worn-out railway stock. We will encourage the use of 
the railways for freight traffic by extending grants for rail freight facilities 
and encouraging the development of trans-shipment depots. 
Heavy lorries will be made to bear their full share of road costs, including 
environment costs. We will cut to a minimum noise and pollution from goods 
vehicles and introduce national routeings and restrictions to take lorries away 
from people. Vehicle Excise Duty for private cars will be abolished and the 
revenue secured by a higher tax on petrol.
Labour believes that, together with a properly enforced licensing system, a 
publicly-owned share of the road haulage industry is essential. It would clearly 
be sensible for the National Freight Company to form part of this sector; and we 
are examining how best to bring this about. 
We will ensure that local authorities are able to give proper support to public 
transport. In areas where more favourable concessionary travel on local 
transport does not exist, we shall bring in a nationwide, off-peak half-fares 
scheme for pensioners. A proper licensing system, to safeguard the network of 
bus services, will be reintroduced. We shall also ensure that a basic minimum 
level of service is provided throughout the country. 
In addition, we will: 
  Encourage the development of effective traffic management schemes to alleviate 
  the problems of traffic congestion. 
  Improve facilities and safety standards for cyclists and increase financial 
  incentives to local authorities to assist these improvements. 
  Give a high priority to building by passes. 
  Establish a national shipping organisation able to acquire and operate 
  shipping services; and protect our shipping and jobs from unfair foreign 
  competition. 
  Invest in inland waterways, and encourage the greater use of them - and of 
  coastal shipping - in the interests of taking freight off our roads. 
  Establish a new National Ports Authority to take ports into public ownership 
  and to develop a new overall strategy for these. 
  Create a National Transport Authority to develop transport policy and good 
  practice, secure integration and facilitate comprehensive planning. 
Law, order and justice 
Labour's aim is to ensure that all sections of the community are safe on the 
street and at home, free from the fear that crime generates. We believe that the 
police should have the support of the community, have their rights safeguarded, 
and be fairly paid. But we also believe that it is as much in the interests of 
the police, as of their local communities, that they are properly accountable 
and fully subject to the law. We will ensure that, throughout the country, the 
police are encouraged to return to the beat and therefore closer to the 
communities they serve. That is the best way of preventing and detecting crime. 
We intend to protect the rights of individual suspects, while providing the 
police with sufficient powers to do their job effectively whilst not infringing 
the civil rights of individual suspects. We aim to create elected police 
authorities in all parts of the country, including London, with statutory 
responsibility for the determination of police policy within their areas. We 
will also: 
  Launch a major initiative to help victims, including extending and simplifying 
  the present Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme. 
  Give priority to crime prevention as part of our action programme for run down 
  estates. 
  Bring about better co-ordination in the technical, support and information 
  services of the police. 
  Replace the present police complaints procedure with an independent system 
  accountable to local communities, with minority police representation. 
  Create community police councils to provide an opportunity for open discussion 
  between police and the community as to the quality and manner of police 
  provision. 
  Introduce strict limits on searches of people in the street, searches of 
  premises, the use of the power of arrest, and on the time a prisoner can be 
  held in custody before being charged. 
  Protect the rights of those in police custody, by giving revised Judges Rules, 
  which safeguard those under arrest or interrogation, the force of law and, in 
  England and Wales, take the role of prosecutor away from the police by 
  implementing a public prosecutor system, on the Procurator Fiscal model. 
  Repeal the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill, because it infringes the rights 
  and freedoms of individuals. 
  Disband the London Special Patrol Groups and local SPGs, which have 
  increasingly been deployed in aggressive public order roles. 
Access to legal services 
We will not allow people's legal rights to go by default. Accessible level 
services are essential to protect human rights. As described in Labour's 
Programme 1982, we will increase central government spending to set up new law 
centres and help existing ones, and to improve the legal aid scheme by widening 
its provisions. We will also introduce a system of appeals against the refusal 
of legal aid in criminal cases. 
We will speed the extension of duty solicitor schemes to all magistrate courts 
and police stations in England and Wales. We will also introduce measures to 
help citizens to secure their legal rights in the areas of tribunal and welfare 
rights law. 
We will co-ordinate the responsibility for advice and legal services so that 
ministerial responsibility is clearer and more direct. We will also establish a 
new Legal Services Commission to be responsible for the provision and financing 
of public legal services. Our aim is to ensure that the expertise and training 
of the legal profession should be geared far more than at present to those legal 
problems affecting ordinary people. 
The penal system 
No one concerned for human dignity and civil rights can find our prison system 
acceptable. We are determined to improve conditions. We do not accept that wives 
and children should be punished together with the prisoners. We will: 
  Reduce the prison population by cutting many maximum sentence lengths for 
  non-violent offenders. We will stop putting petty offenders into prison. We 
  will expand non-custodial alternatives, and examine new penalties involving 
  reparation and restitution to the victim. We will also introduce a maximum 
  period of custody for those on remand, along the lines of the provisions in 
  Scotland. 
  Treat prisoners as human beings by providing reasonable conditions in our 
  prisons. We will incorporate, in new, legally enforceable prison rules, 
  minimum standards on such matters as cell space. And we will reduce 
  unnecessary restrictions - for example on prisoners' correspondence. 
  Refurbish urban prisons. 
  Hand over all specialist services in prisons, such as medical care, to the 
  normal community agencies. 
  Establish a genuinely independent complaints and disciplinary procedure to 
  replace the current board of visitors system; and provide better aftercare for 
  those leaving prison, to help them resettle in the community. 
  Improve the training, working conditions and job opportunities of prison 
  officers. 
  Examine the additional problems faced by women prisoners, especially those 
  with young children. 
Equal rights 
The next Labour government will lead a political offensive against racial 
disadvantage, discrimination and harassment; and we have set out our proposals 
in Labour's Programme 1982. To encourage equality and reduce discrimination, we 
will greatly expand funding to ethnic minority projects. We will also encourage 
local authorities, in selecting projects under the Urban Programme, to provide 
for greater ethnic minority participation. We will also: 
  Stimulate a wide range of positive action programmes to ensure that ethnic 
  minorities receive a fair deal - in employment, education, housing and social 
  services: and encourage the keeping of ethnic records, in order to assess the 
  needs of ethnic minorities and take steps to meet them. 
  Launch a major public education initiative aimed at eliminating prejudice. 
  Strengthen the existing Race Relations Act - in particular, to enable us to 
  deal more effectively with racialist literature, speeches and marches; and to 
  remove the exception for seamen recruited abroad. 
  Appoint a senior minister to lead the offensive against racial inequality. 
We are concerned that homosexuals are unfairly treated. We will take steps to 
ensure that they are not unfairly discriminated against - especially in 
employment and in the definition of privacy contained in the 1967 Act - along 
the lines set out in Labour's Programme, 1982. 
Nationality and immigration 
Through their immigration and nationality laws, the Tories have divided families 
and caused immense suffering in the immigrant communities. We accept the need 
for immigration controls. But we will repeal the 1971 Immigration Act and the 
1981 British Nationality Act and replace them with a citizenship law that does 
not discriminate against either women or black and Asian Britons. 
Under our Nationality Act, we will restore rights removed by the Tories, such as 
the right to automatic citizenship if born in Britain. The Act will enable other 
Commonwealth and foreign nationals to acquire citizenship if they qualify by 
objective tests, and provide a right of appeal against the refusal of an 
application for citizenship. We will also ensure that the cost of acquiring 
citizenship will no longer be an obstacle to those who wish to apply. 
Under our new Immigration Act we will liberalise the age limit criteria for 
children and the criteria for elderly parents and other relatives. We will 
simplify the procedures and commit the resources necessary for all applications 
to be processed promptly; and allow medical examinations, including x-rays, only 
for medical, not administrative purposes. The race and sex discrimination in the 
husbands and fiances' rules will be ended: we will restore the entitlement to 
admission to join a woman settled here irrespective of her citizenship, 
birthplace or ancestry. We will also ensure that immigration officials fully 
respect the human rights of those seeking entry. We will also: 
  Consult Commonwealth governments so as to resolve the question of the other 
  British nationals from independent countries who possess no other citizenship. 

  Provide a right of appeal for those who the Home Secretary proposes to deport 
  or exclude on security grounds. 
  Establish a more independent and balanced panel of adjudicators for 
  immigration appeals. 
A wider democracy 
Labour will take action to enhance democratic rights and ensure greater openness 
and accountability in the institutions of government. We have set out our 
policies in Labour's Programme, 1982. We shall: 
  Introduce a Freedom of Information Bill, providing for a genuine system of 
  open government and placing the onus on the authorities to justify withholding 
  information. 
  Bring in data protection legislation to prevent the abuse of confidential 
  information held on personal files; and, subject to certain exceptions, allow 
  individuals access to their personal records. 
  Reform the administration of government and the civil service machine so that 
  it meets modern needs and is properly accountable to elected representatives. 
  We recognise the damage done to the morale and efficiency of the civil service 
  by this government. We will work to repair this damage, together with the 
  unions, and to give proper recognition to the importance of the work of the 
  service. 
  Take action to abolish the undemocratic House of Lords as quickly as possible 
  and, as an interim measure, introduce a Bill in the first session of 
  parliament to remove its legislative powers - with the exception of those 
  which relate to the life of a parliament. 
  Make improvements in the legislative process and procedures in the House of 
  Commons. 
  Reform the procedures for appointments to public bodies to ensure they are 
  more open and genuinely representative of the community. 
  Overhaul the outdated honours system. 
  Give a new priority to making our public services more responsive to the needs 
  and wishes of those who use them. Wherever possible we will decentralise 
  services to make them as close as possible to those who use them. We will also 
  provide more effective procedures for complaints - with clear rights for users 
  - and ensure better training and status for those in contact with the public. 
Labour believes that state aid for political parties is now essential for the 
working of our parliamentary democracy. We will introduce such aid, along the 
lines set out in the Houghton Report, with the funds available adjusted to 
today's prices and index linked. 
The security services 
There is now widespread concern about our security services. We intend that they 
should become properly accountable institutions - and that the civil rights of 
individuals are fully protected. We outline in Labour's Programme, 1982 our 
proposals for a new Security Act, to define the powers and responsibilities of 
the services, including those concerned with the interception of communications. 
We will also extend parliamentary accountability - including over the accounts 
of the services - which will be assisted by a new select committee; prohibit, 
under the Security Act, unauthorised surveillance; and abolish 'D' notices. 
Local democracy 
Labour is determined to strengthen local democracy. We will shift radically the 
balance between central and local government and give local communities much 
more say about how their services are run. 
First, we will give local authorities freedom to implement comprehensive local 
plans, covering economic, social and environmental policies. We explain 
elsewhere in this document, and more fully in Labour's Programme, 1982, our 
proposals to assist local authorities to create jobs, to establish local 
enterprise boards and engage in local economic planning. We will reverse Tory 
policies on the privatisation of local authority services.
Second, we will expand the scope for local democracy. Instead of local 
councillors never being completely sure what is permitted and what is ultra 
vires, we shall give a power of general competence to all local authorities to 
carry out whatever activities are not expressly forbidden by statute. We shall 
also seek to define the relationship between central and local government - as 
part of our consideration of the universal application of realistic minimum 
standards - so that basic provision of key services is available in all parts of 
the country. We will also: 
Take action to encourage councils to make their services more responsive to the 
needs and wishes of their clients and of the local community. 
Extend workers' rights and industrial democracy in local government, by enabling 
non-voting employee representatives to be co-opted on to committees, and 
encouraging the introduction of formal procedures for participation in decisions 
on the implementation of policy. We will also allow all but the most senior 
officers the right to become elected or co-opted members of the authority which 
employs them. 
Pay proper allowances, and provide adequate administrative support, to local 
councillors. 
We are examining how best to reform local government. We believe that services 
such as health, water and sewerage should become answerable to a much greater 
extent to elected members; and we aim to end, if we can, the present confusing 
division of services between two tiers of authority. Unitary district 
authorities, in England and Wales, could be responsible for all of the functions 
in this area that they could sensibly undertake. We will also ensure that the 
City of London is absorbed into a reformed democratic system of local 
government. For Scotland, any reform of local government will be a matter for 
our proposed Scottish Assembly. 
Local government finance 
Labour will reverse the Tory government's attacks on local authority services. 
We shall provide finance, through the rate support grant, to allow local 
authority expenditure to grow in line with our plans for economic expansion; and 
the hard-pressed urban areas will benefit especially from an increased share of 
the resources available.
Labour believes in active local democracy. We will therefore repeal the Tory 
legislation which allows the government to impose ceilings on local authority 
spending, and to impose penalties on local authorities whose spending exceeds 
those ceilings. We shall repeal the ban on supplementary rates. We will restore 
the right of local authorities to spend additional amounts from revenue on 
capital expenditure in excess of loan sanction limits. The rate support grant 
system will be recast to give fairer treatment to areas in greatest need and the 
maximum freedom of action for local authorities to control their own budgets. 
Labour will also enact legislation to abolish the penalty of personal surcharge 
on individual councillors. Instead councillors, like others in the community, 
will be liable at law for any unlawful or illegal acts. Public audit will be 
confined to that purpose and auditors will not be permitted to involve 
themselves in judgements on politics or policies. 
Devolution to Scotland 
Labour is determined to decentralise power in decision-making. In Scotland, the 
people have shown their support for devolution in a referendum and at successive 
general elections; and we have set out our proposals for devolution in a major 
statement, Scotland and Devolution. Labour will: 
  Establish a directly elected Scottish Assembly, with an executive drawn from 
  members of the assembly. 
  Provide the Assembly with legislative and executive powers over a wide range 
  of domestic policy, including matters such as health, education and social 
  welfare. 
  Ensure a major role for the Assembly in assisting in the regeneration of 
  Scottish industry - including the preparation and implementation of a Plan for 
  Scotland - within the context of our overall national plan. 
  As well as receiving grants from central government, the Scottish Assembly 
  will have tax-raising powers, thus ensuring that the level of services 
  provided can be determined in Scotland. 
Northern Ireland 
Labour believes that Ireland should, by peaceful means and on the basis of 
consent, be united, and recognises that this will be achieved with the 
introduction of socialist policies. We respect and support, however, the right 
of the Northern Ireland people to remain within the UK, although this does not 
mean that Unionist leaders can have a veto on political development; and we 
accept that, to achieve agreement and consent between the two parts of Ireland, 
we must create greater unity within the Northern Ireland community. 
In our 1981 conference statement and in Labour's Programme 1982, we set out in 
full Labour's policy on Northern Ireland. We will aim to establish an agreed, 
devolved administration. In the meantime, we will continue with direct rule. We 
will also initiate early discussions between the British government, the Irish 
government, the Irish Labour Party, and the trade unions on both sides of the 
border, and political representatives of the people of Northern Ireland, on how 
best to proceed with our policy of unification by consent. 
Tory policies have been a disaster for the Northern Ireland economy. 
Unemployment has soared. The economy is in ruins. Housing and the social 
services are in desperate straits. Labour will give new hope to Northern 
Ireland. We will create jobs and provide investment. We will use all of the 
economic planning powers and institutions set out in this document - together 
with a massive injection of public resources - to rebuild the economy. 
We will also act on security and civil rights, along the lines set out in our 
1981 statement. We will repeal the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Payment 
of Debt Act and reform the system of Diplock courts. We will provide equal 
rights for women, including rights to abortion, and make progress towards an 
integrated comprehensive system of education. 
Leisure for living 
Labour believes that a comprehensive approach is needed, at national and local 
levels, to provide services and facilities for leisure. 
The arts 
A crucial part will be played in this by the arts. Labour's aim is to make the 
arts, in their broadest sense, an accepted part of everyday life for the whole 
population. We will place special emphasis on their availability to the young, 
the handicapped and the retired. Substantial extra funds will be provided, with 
priority being given to the regions and to access for those on low incomes. 
Local authorities will have a statutory duty to provide adequate arts and 
entertainments facilities; and the arts will be zero-rated in respect of VAT. 
We will retain a Minister of the Arts, whose first task will be to undertake a 
major survey on the disparities in provision between regions and to produce 
proposals for action. The public bodies which support the arts will also be made 
more open and accountable, and include more representation from workers in the 
arts, local authorities and consumers. The Craft Council will be strengthened, 
and regional museums and galleries supported through a Museums and Galleries 
Council. 
For the film industry, we will establish a British Film Authority, responsible 
for the National Film Finance Corporation. This will ensure that revenue from a 
levy on ticket sales goes to British film-makers who produce British films. We 
will also ensure that the profits from British film-making and distribution are 
channelled back into British films - and that the present two-company monopoly 
of film distribution in Britain is ended. The new British Film Authority will be 
responsible for extending public ownership into film distribution. 
Sport and recreation 
Labour will accept responsibility for the provision of a broadly-based leisure 
service. We will: 
  Encourage greater participation in sport and recreation. 
  Give incentives to voluntary bodies to involve themselves more widely in the 
  provision of sporting and community facilities. 
  Encourage local authorities and other owners of facilities to make them much 
  more available to public use. 
  Set up an immediate enquiry into the financial basis of sport and recreation. 
    Review the provision of national sporting facilities, so as to secure a 
    fairer geographical distribution. 
    Ensure that the sporting talent of the nation receives sufficient support to 
    enable them to bring sporting success to Britain. 
We will also provide for the wider use of the countryside for recreational 
purposes, such as angling and other water-based sports. Angling will be given 
additional support, by ensuring wider access to rivers and lakes, financial 
assistance to provide a wider ownership of fishing waters, improvements in 
respect of conservation, and action to prevent pollution. 
The media 
Our aims in the media are to safeguard freedom of expression, encourage 
diversity and establish greater accountability. For all the media, we will 
introduce a statutory right of reply to ensure that individuals can set the 
record straight. We will introduce stronger measures to prevent any further 
concentration in the media. 
For the press, we will encourage diversity by: 
  Setting up a launch fund to assist new publications. 
  Ensuring that all major wholesalers accept any lawful publication, and arrange 
  for its proper supply and display, subject to a handling charge. 
  Preventing acquisition of further newspapers by large press chains. 
  Protecting freedom of expression by prohibiting joint control of the press, 
  commercial radio and television. 
  Breaking up major concentrations of press ownership, by setting an upper limit 
  for the number of major publications in the hands of a single proprietor or 
  press group. 
  Replacing the Press Council with a stronger, more representative body. 
In broadcasting, we Will aim to make both broadcasting itself, and the 
organisations responsible, more accountable and representative - and to provide 
greater public access. Our aim is to promote a more wide-ranging and genuine 
pluralism in the media, and we set out our prop6sals in Labour's Programme 1982. 
We will also seek to introduce a genuinely independent adjudication of 
grievances and complaints. The licence fee will be phased out for pensioners, 
during the lifetime of the Labour government. 
The high standards of British public service broadcasting are threatened by Tory 
plans to introduce cable TV on free-market principles. We will regulate 
satellite and cable provision and foster the same principles of diversity and 
pluralism as conventional broadcasting authorities. To avoid wasteful 
duplication, we will entrust the provision of the national cable system to 
British Telecom. 
Animal protection 
The Labour Party was the first major political party to publish a policy 
statement, in 1978, on animal protection - Living Without Cruelty; and these 
policies are reaffirmed in Labour's Programme 1982. We believe that all animals 
- whether in the wild, domesticated or farmed - should be properly treated. 
To achieve our aims we will transform the Farm Animal Welfare Council into a 
Standing Royal Commission on Animal Protection. We will also urgently review the 
1876 Cruelty to Animals Act. A high priority will be given to research into 
alternatives to using live animals in experiments, and to restrictions on the 
use of live animals in experiments - with proper control and supervision in 
order to avoid pain. 
Hare coursing, fox hunting and all forms of hunting with dogs will be made 
illegal. This will not, however, affect shooting and fishing. The use of snares 
will also be made illegal. 
We will lay down clear conditions on freedom of movement for livestock; and we 
will ensure that our legislation meets, at least, the requirements of the 
European Convention for the Protection of Animals kept for Farming Purposes. We 
will also ban, over a phased period, all extreme livestock systems and introduce 
legislation to ensure that animals are slaughtered as near as possible to the 
point of production. We will ban the export of live food animals. 
Animals kept in zoos, circuses and safari parks will be included in our animals 
protection legislation. Health and safety at work legislation will be reviewed 
in order to better protect people employed on such premises. 
Britain and the Common Market 
Geography and history determine that Britain is part of Europe, and Labour wants 
to see Europe safe and prosperous. But the European Economic Community, which 
does not even include the whole of Western Europe, was never devised to suit us, 
and our experience as a member of it has made it more difficult for us to deal 
with our economic and industrial problems. It has sometimes weakened our ability 
to achieve the objectives of Labour's international policy. 
The next Labour government, committed to radical, socialist policies for 
reviving the British economy, is bound to find continued membership a most 
serious obstacle to the fulfilment of those policies. In particular the rules of 
the Treaty of Rome are bound to conflict with our strategy for economic growth 
and full employment, our proposals on industrial policy and for increasing 
trade, and our need to restore exchange controls and to regulate direct overseas 
investment. Moreover, by preventing us from buying food from the best sources of 
world supply, they would run counter to our plans to control prices and 
inflation. 
For all these reasons, British withdrawal from the Community is the right policy 
for Britain - to be completed well within the lifetime of the parliament. That 
is our commitment. But we are also committed to bring about withdrawal in an 
amicable and orderly way, so that we do not prejudice employment or the prospect 
of increased political and economic co-operation with the whole of Europe. 
We emphasise that our decision to bring about withdrawal in no sense represents 
any weakening of our commitment to internationalism and international co 
operation. We are not 'withdrawing from Europe'. We are seeking to extricate 
ourselves from the Treaty of Rome and other Community treaties which place 
political burdens on Britain. Indeed, we believe our withdrawal will allow us to 
pursue a more dynamic and positive international policy - one which recognises 
the true political and geographical spread of international problems and 
interests. We will also seek agreement with other European governments - both in 
the EEC and outside - on a common strategy for economic expansion. 
The process of withdrawal 
On taking office we will open preliminary negotiations with the other EEC member 
states to establish a timetable for withdrawal; and we will publish the results 
of these negotiations in a White Paper. In addition, as soon as possible after 
the House assembles, we will introduce a Repeal Bill: first, in order to amend 
the 1972 European Communities Act, ending the powers of the Community in the UK; 
and second, to provide the necessary powers to repeal the 1972 Act, when the 
negotiations on withdrawal are completed. 
Following the publication of the White Paper, we will begin the main 
negotiations on withdrawal. Later, when appropriate and in the same parliament, 
we will use our powers to repeal the 1972 Act and abrogate the Treaty of 
Accession - thus breaking all of our formal links with the Community. Britain 
will at this point withdraw from the Council of Ministers and from the European 
Parliament. 
There will need to be a period of transition, to ensure a minimum of disruption 
- and to phase in any new agreements we might make with the Community. This will 
enable us to make all the necessary changes in our domestic legislation. Until 
these changes in UK law have taken place, the status quo as regards particular 
items of EEC legislation will remain. And this period will, of course, extend 
beyond the date when we cease, formally, to be members. 
The international dimension 
The Labour Party is working to create a democratic socialist society in Britain, 
but we realise to achieve this we must enjoy the fullest international 
co-operation. There is a real interdependence between nations, and, if Britain 
under Labour is not to stand on the sidelines, we must co-operate to survive. 
Our foreign policy is a logical extension of our work at home. 
A deep crisis now afflicts the world economy. In the developed world, recession 
has meant lengthening dole queues and a falling standard of life; for the 
peoples of the Third World, recession has added to an already intolerable burden 
of poverty. Unlike the Tories, Labour believes that there is a way out of the 
crisis, and that we need not accept an international status quo so manifestly 
riddled with injustice, inefficiency and waste. Labour will pursue and win 
international support for policies designed to stimulate trade, investment, and 
growth; and we shall work inside the appropriate institutions to end the 
financial chaos which now threatens the stability of so many countries. There 
can be no sure prospect of peace in a world wracked by an enduring economic 
crisis. Labour's policies will help bring that crisis to an end. 
Labour recognises the urgent need to restore détente and dialogue between the 
states and the peoples of the world. We will actively pursue dialogue with the 
Soviet Union and China, and will urge the American government to do so. We will 
work consistently for peace and disarmament, and devote all our efforts to 
pulling the world back from the nuclear abyss. Labour will dedicate some of the 
resources currently wasted on armaments to projects designed to promote both 
security and human development. 
An essential difference between the Labour and the Tory approach is that we have 
a foreign policy that will help liberate the peoples of the world from 
oppression, want and fear. We seek to find ways in which social and political 
progress can be achieved and to identify the role that Britain can play in this 
process. 
Our objectives cannot be pursued in isolation; we will work with the 
international agencies, friendly governments, and with socialist parties and 
genuine liberation movements in order to convert these objectives into concrete 
achievements. 
Disarmament - the international context 
The pursuit of peace, development and disarmament is central to our policy. We 
wish to strengthen the process of détente, which means the easing of political 
as well as military tension between East and West. A third world war would 
destroy civilisation, yet the danger of a nuclear holocaust grows alarmingly. 
Labour is determined that Britain should play its full part in the struggle for 
peace. Now in 1983, in what is a critical year for peace, we can begin to 
influence events by the way we present the imperative case for disarmament. In 
government we can carry that influence much further, by example and by common 
action with others. We must use unilateral steps taken by Britain to secure 
multilateral solutions on the international level. Unilateralism and 
multilateralism must go hand ill hand if either is to succeed. It is for this 
reason that we are against moves that would disrupt our existing alliances, but 
are resolved on measures to enable Britain to pursue a non-nuclear defence 
policy. 
To achieve our paramount aim - stopping the nuclear arms race itself, and the 
other arms races pursued beneath its shadow - we need stronger international 
institutions. First and foremost is a United Nations organisation with real and 
growing authority. Labour is determined to sustain and fortify the United 
Nations. All our recent experience re-emphasises how necessary it is to have an 
international Charter against aggression. It is a tragedy that the 1982 UN 
Special Session on Disarmament was allowed to disband in failure and 
disappointment. We shall work to recall a new session on a more ambitious and 
hopeful basis. We will support the commitments of the UN Special Sessions on 
Disarmament and the UN Committee on Disarmament. 
We shall seek to restore the Final Document on Disarmament, approved by the 1978 
United Nations Special Session, as the long-term objective. But, of course, as 
the international tension sharpens, we must pursue other more immediate aims. 
Labour has always opposed Soviet deployment of SS20s. We want to see the Geneva 
talks on intermediate weapons succeed. Labour was arguing that they should begin 
long before President Reagan and Mrs. Thatcher came round to the idea. It is 
imperative that the SALT II agreement is ratified. We shall work for this. We 
strongly support the reduction of strategic weapons in the START talks. We will 
propose urgent action to make the Non-Proliferation Treaty effective and to keep 
it effective. The uncontrolled proliferation of nuclear weapons would enormously 
increase the danger to us all. 
Following the steps taken by the last Labour government in such fields as non 
proliferation and the Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction talks, Britain must 
again take a lead in disarmament negotiations. 
Defence policy 
The overriding task for Britain, as for the rest of the world, is to draw back 
from the nuclear abyss. Britain must act on her own account as well as seeking 
agreement with other countries on nuclear disarmament. 
One immediate step our government must take is to insist on implementing the 
recent United Nations call for a freeze on the production, deployment and 
testing of nuclear weapons, and for a comprehensive test ban. That the Tory 
government should have voted against these propositions in the United Nations is 
deplorable, and betrays our country's capacity to play a leading role as an 
advocate of world disarmament. Labour's proposals will help to restore that 
opportunity. 
Labour believes in effective defence through collective security but rejects the 
present emphasis on nuclear weapons. Britain and her allies should have 
sufficient military strength to discourage external aggression and to defend 
themselves should they be attacked. Labour's commitment is to establish a 
non-nuclear defence policy for this country. This means the rejection of any 
fresh nuclear bases or weapons on British soil or in British waters, and the 
removal of all existing nuclear bases and weapons, thus enabling us to make a 
direct contribution to an eventually much wider nuclear-free zone in Europe. 
However, all this cannot be done at once, and the way we do it must be designed 
to assist in the task to which we are also committed - securing nuclear 
disarmament agreements with other countries and maintaining co operation with 
our allies. 
The most pressing objective must be to prevent the deployment here or elsewhere 
in Western Europe of Cruise or Pershing missiles. This deployment would mark a 
new and dangerous escalation in the nuclear arms race. It would make the 
achievement of effective disarmament agreements covering these and other weapons 
much more difficult in the future. We will therefore not permit the siting of 
Cruise missiles in this country and will remove any that are already in place. 
The next Labour government will cancel the Trident programme. Apart from the 
huge, persisting and distorting burden it would impose on our defence budget and 
our economy as a whole, it would not offer security but would rather help to 
intensify the arms race. We will propose that Britain's Polaris force be 
included in the nuclear disarmament negotiations in which Britain must take 
part. We will, after consultation, carry through in the lifetime of the next 
parliament our non-nuclear defence policy. 
Labour believes in collective security. The next Labour government will maintain 
its support for NATO, as an instrument of détente no less than of defence. We 
wish to see NATO itself develop a non-nuclear strategy. We will work towards the 
establishment of a new security system in Europe based on mutual trust and 
confidence, and knowledge of the objectives and capabilities of all sides. The 
ultimate objective of a satisfactory relationship in Europe is the mutual and 
concurrent phasing out of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact. 
We oppose any attempt to expand the role of the alliance into other continents. 
We condemn the doctrine that nuclear war can be limited, and the notion that 
somehow the West must catch up with a supposed nuclear superiority in the East. 
We are opposed to the introduction into Europe of any new nuclear systems such 
as the neutron bomb. We oppose, too, the storage, research and production of 
chemical and biological weapons, and call for the withdrawal of all forward 
stocks of chemical weapons. 
Labour will reduce the proportion of the nation's resources devoted to defence 
so that the burden we bear will be brought into line with that of the other 
major European NATO countries, without increasing the reliance on nuclear 
weapons. A Labour government will plan to ensure that savings in military 
expenditure do not lead to unemployment for those working in defence industries. 
We shall give material support and encouragement to plans for industrial 
conversion so that the valuable resources of the defence industries can be used 
for the production of useful goods. 
The emphasis of our defence priorities in the 1980s and 1990s must be to create 
military forces that are clearly equipped and deployed for defensive purposes, 
and tailored more to Britain's geography and economic resources. This will mean 
maintaining adequate conventional forces, at present threatened by the 
extravagant expenditure on Trident. 
We are alarmed by the growth of the arms trade. Labour will limit Britain's arms 
sales abroad and ban the supply of arms to repressive regimes such as South 
Africa, El Salvador, Chile, Argentina and Turkey. We will not supply arms to 
countries where the chances of international aggression or internal repression 
would be increased. Labour will ensure that all arms sales are under strict 
ministerial control, subject to parliamentary accountability. 
The Commonwealth and the developing world 
We shall continue to work for the peaceful and just settlement of disputes and 
the strengthening of international organisations, particularly the Commonwealth, 
as well as the United Nations. Labour has always attached a special significance 
to the Commonwealth - a unique forum of nations, cutting across ethnic, cultural 
and ideological barriers. We will strengthen Britain's political and material 
commitment to the Commonwealth. 
The future prosperity of Britain, as well as that of other industrialised 
countries, is inextricably linked to the future of the developing world. At the 
moment some 30 per cent of Britain's manufacturing exports are destined for 
Third World countries with which we enjoy a very healthy balance of trade. If 
their economies could be stimulated, the gain would be ours as well as theirs. 
Countless British jobs have already come about as a consequence of our trading 
relationship with the poorer countries. That relationship must be strengthened 
and expanded in the interests of working people both in Britain and overseas. 
The war that Labour will wage on poverty in Britain will be extended to the 
developing world. A primary objective of the next Labour government's foreign 
policy will be to help revive the North-South dialogue. That some 800,000,000 
people should be condemned to a life of absolute poverty in the Third World is 
an affront to any version of civilised values, as well as a constant threat to 
international peace and stability. 
Labour sets a high priority on attacking the causes of mass poverty. A Labour 
government will reach the UN sponsored aid target of 0.7 per cent of Gross 
National Product and work towards a further target of 1.0 per cent. We will also 
re-establish the principle that aid must be used in the interests of the poorest 
people in the poorest countries and, in our efforts to bring this about, we will 
fund as appropriate, both governments and independent organisations. Labour will 
set up once again a separate Ministry of Overseas Development with a cabinet 
minister. 
Labour will plan an expansion of trade with the developing world and will work 
to bring about changes in the international trading system that will be of 
benefit to poor countries, allowing them to receive stable prices for their 
commodity exports and to diversify their production. In trade agreements, Labour 
will insist upon workers' rights and will bring in legislation to control the 
activities of British-based multinational companies operating overseas. 
Labour believes that, in order to enhance the prospects of the Third World 
economies, it will be vital to ensure that organisations such as the World Bank 
and the International Monetary Fund receive adequate funding from the world 
community, and provide loans in a way that, taking into account the economic 
difficulties faced by each developing country, will improve the condition of 
their peoples. 
There is much Britain can do to lift people out of absolute poverty, and a 
Labour Britain will once again speak out in solidarity with the poor and the 
oppressed everywhere. 
We will ensure that provision for overseas students is based on a major 
expansion of the ODA programme for student sponsorship giving preference to 
entrants on grounds of origin, income level and availability of courses in 
Britain and elsewhere. 
The Law of the Sea 
Labour welcomes the recently concluded United Nations Conference on the Law of 
the Sea and fully supports the UNCLOS proposal for a new international regime 
covering every aspect of ocean use. Unlike either the Tory government or the 
Reagan administration, Labour will endorse the Law of the Sea, which we see as a 
crucial element in the North-South dialogue, and will ensure that Britain 
participates actively in the future progress of UNCLOS. 
Near and Middle East 
The Labour Party is committed to the promotion of peace, democracy and socialism 
in the Middle East, and to the principle of national self-determination. The 
Arab-Israeli conflict remains a major element in the continuing conflict and 
tension in the region, through not the only one. The core of the conflict is the 
struggle between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples for the realisation of 
national self-determination. 
We shall therefore: 
  Support the right of all Israelis to live in peace and security in the state 
  of Israel, within secure internationally recognised borders. 
  Support the right of Palestinians to self determination, including the 
  establishment of a Palestinian state. 
The suffering of the Lebanese people and their continued occupation by foreign 
forces demands our attention, and we shall work for the restoration of the 
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Lebanon, and play a 
full part in its reconstruction. 
The Turkish dictatorship is of special concern to Britain, given Turkish 
membership of NATO and its status in Europe. We deplore the constitution imposed 
upon the Turkish people and will work for the restoration of freedom and 
democracy. Until this is achieved we shall oppose assistance to the Turkish 
junta.
Labour is deeply concerned by the continuing violation of human rights 
throughout the Middle East. Labour will do what it can to help those struggling 
for freedom, democracy, civil and trade union rights. 
We support genuine guarantees for the independent, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of Cyprus, and the pursuit of intercommunal discussions sponsored by 
the UN for as long as both communities are committed to those talks. 
Africa 
We are totally opposed to apartheid and will unequivocally support its 
opponents, giving financial and material assistance to the liberation movements 
in South Africa and SWAPO of Namibia. Labour will also work with our trade union 
colleagues to assist the non-racial trade unions in. South Africa. 
We will carry through a systematic programme of economic disengagement from 
South Africa by supporting comprehensive mandatory sanctions at the UN and 
curtailing our economic relations with the regime. The details of our policy 
towards Southern Africa are set out in Labour's Programme 1982. 
Latin America 
Latin America is a continent in crisis. The world recession and severe financial 
difficulties have added to the burden of already frail economies. Democracy is 
established in very few countries; torture and death are instruments of control 
in many areas. 
Central America is of particular concern. Treated for decades by the United 
States as its backyard, the countries of this region have almost without 
exception failed to establish a tradition of representative democracy. Millions 
of people have endured a lifetime of oppression and deprivation. In recent 
years, the pressure for social change to respond to basic needs has grown 
intense, but has met with the firm resistance of the wealthy and the powerful, 
invariably backed by Washington. This is true of El Salvador, Nicaragua and 
Guatemala. Labour rejects US policy in Central America. Regrettably, the Tory 
government has connected Britain with that policy by its slavish support for 
everything the Reagan administration says and does. This applies even in the 
case of Guatemala, which the US is re-arming, when it lays claim to Belize, to 
whose defence we are committed. 
Labour will do everything in its power to weaken Latin America's repressive 
governments by, for example, withdrawing diplomatic representation, opposing 
multilateral loans, banning arms sales and drawing international attention to 
human rights violations. Our detailed policy is set out in Labour's Programme 
1982. 
Falkland Islands 
Mrs. Thatcher's policy of Fortress Falklands is imposing an intolerable burden 
both on the British people and on the inhabitants of the Falklands themselves. 
The war, which wiser policies could have avoided, has already cost us 
&pound;1,000 million. On top of that the Conservative government plans to spend 
&pound;600 million a year for the indefinite future on garrisoning the islands - 
£1 1/2 million per year for every Falklands family. 
With four British servicemen on the islands to every adult male Falklander, the 
traditional way of life of this rural community is being destroyed. Yet at the 
same time Mrs. Thatcher is allowing British firms to equip warships for the 
Argentine dictatorship and is lending money to General Bignone to spend on arms. 
A Labour government would not sell arms to any Argentine government which was 
hostile to Britain or denied civil rights and democratic freedoms to its own 
people. Labour believes that Britain must restore normal links between the 
Falklands and the Latin American mainland, and that the United Nations must be 
involved in finding a permanent settlement of the problem. 
Asia 
Emotional as well as political ties exist between Britain and many of the 
countries of Asia. It was the 1945 Labour government which gave independence to 
India and Pakistan. 
Labour is concerned about the suppression of human and civil rights in many of 
the countries of Asia, and we will support every extension of democracy in the 
region. A Labour government will end military involvement with those countries 
that have repressive regimes. 
The Labour Party is concerned that the Tory policy on overseas students' fees 
has already affected the ability of students from Asia, as well as elsewhere, to 
undertake courses in Britain. Steps will be taken to improve the position, as 
laid out in a previous section. 
Labour believes in a closer understanding with China, and hopes that China can 
become more directly involved in international discussions on peace, disarmament 
and the world economy. We will hold talks with China with the aim of securing a 
peaceful and prosperous future for the people of Hong Kong. 
Japan is a major power in the world economy. We hope to persuade Japan to play a 
more active part in a concerted expansion of the economies of the industrial 
nations, and to remove the obstacles that her trade policies now create. We also 
hope that Japan will help to bridge the division between North and South by 
increasing her aid to the Third World. 
Human rights 
Labour gives the highest priority to the protection of human dignity, civil 
rights, democracy and freedom, which will be reflected in all that a Labour 
government does. 
We uphold the rights of all nations to self-determination. Accordingly, we 
condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and US support for repressive regimes 
in Central America. We warn against all military interventions contrary to the 
UN Charter. We condemn violations of human rights wherever they occur, whether 
in Poland, Turkey or Nigeria, and whatever the complexion of the government 
concerned. Labour will further the cause of human rights in all international 
organisations. We will press for suspension from NATO of any dictatorship. 
We will protect the opponents of regimes from harassment by their government's 
representatives in Britain. Our policy on refugees will be more compassionate 
than that of the Tory government. We will not deport individuals who would face 
arrest or death in their own countries. 
We will also take into account human rights considerations when giving aid. 
Official aid will not be given to governments that persistently violate civil 
and trade union rights. Help will instead be given to the victims of repression.

British Labour Party election manifesto, 1987Labour Party: 1987 
Britain will win with Labour



INTRODUCTION
BY THE LEADER OF THE LABOUR PARTY 
Every election is a time of decision. But this General Election on June 11 faces 
the British people with choices more sharp than at any time in the past fifty 
years. 
The choices are between Labour's programme of work for people and Tory policies 
of waste of people: between investment in industrial strength, and acceptance of 
industrial decline; between a Britain with competitive, modern industries, and a 
Britain with a low tech, low paid, low security economy increasingly dependent 
upon imports. 
The election will decide whether we and our children are to live in a country 
that builds high standards of care for all who need treatment for illness, 
pensions in retirement, good grounding in education, fair chances to get on; or 
in a country where the Conservatives go on running down the vital health, 
education and social services of every community, imposing higher charges and 
lower standards. 
This election will decide whether our country is to be a United Kingdom or a 
divided kingdom; one that is brought together by proper provision, prudent 
investment and concern for the interests of the whole nation, or one that is 
pulled apart by poverty, cuts, increased privilege for the richest and neglect 
for the rest. 
This election will decide whether we put our resources into the real defence 
provided by a modern, well-equipped army, navy and airforce safeguarding our 
country an d supporting NATO; or spend those sums on maintaining an ageing 
system of nuclear weapons, while buying a new generation of missiles which 
cannot give our country effective defence. It will decide whether Britain is 
part of the international process of nuclear build down or ruled by a government 
uniquely intent upon nuclear build-up. 
We already know what a third term for Mrs Thatcher would mean for the people of 
Britain. 
Under the Tories there have been: 
Eight years of record unemployment, relentless industrial closures and 
redundancies, of flooding imports and shrunken investment. 
Eight years of the highest ever tax burden on the family and the nation as VAT, 
National Insurance, rates and fees have all been put up in a shift to taxes on 
spending and employment. 
Eight years of cuts and closures and charges, of intensified means tests and 
reduced services. 
Eight years of increased state control, of centralising government of abolition 
of rights of representation and negotiation. 
Eight years of rising crime, of greater insecurity on the streets and housing 
estates and in the home. 
Eight years of meanness towards the needy in our country and towards the 
wretched of the world. 
Eight years of growing division - in health in opportunity. in housing 
conditions in work and in income - between regions communities classes. 
families, white and black, rich and poor. 
The Tories say they are 'proud of their record'. So proud indeed that they would 
want to do more of the same if they were re-elected. 
Their plans for a poll tax would penalise millions of families, pensioners and 
young people. Their refusal to provide the resources needed for the Health 
Service and their plans for imposing further payment and privatisation will hit 
everyone in the service and everyone needing to use it. 
They would, if they won power again, privatise water, electricity, steel and 
other services, and industries built up by public investment over past years. 
They want to impose penal increases in rents for private and public tenants. 
They are committed to introducing compulsory labour for young unemployed people. 

All this and worse would come with a third term of Tory government. 
Britain cannot afford more of that run-down, sell-off and split-up, nor all the 
costs and waste that they bring. 
Britain does not have to. 
Britain can stop the rot - but only by voting Labour. 
There is no other way to prevent thirteen years of Thatcherism. 
No party other than Labour can possibly win enough seats to form a government. 
The Liberals and SDP know that. Their hope is to profit from confusion. To 
divide the non-Conservative vote in such a way as to make them the 'hook' in a 
'hung' Parliament and have power far beyond their responsibility. 
And, while one of their leaders clearly favours an arrangement to sustain a 
Conservative government, the other hasn't the strength to stop him. 
That offers no way ahead for a nation that needs to get on with investing for 
change, for quality, for confidence in the future. 
Proper support for education, strengthened research and development and 
long-term, low interest finance for industrial growth are all essential if 
Britain is to gain the vitality necessary to outpace competitors who have been 
building these assets for years. 
They are essential too if we are to generate the wealth needed for the security, 
care and opportunity fundamental to the individual freedom of women and men of 
all ages and origins. When our country faces the common pressures on the 
environment, the common dangers of crime, the common costs of unemployment, 
under-investment and under-performance together, our country has every 
commonsense reason to meet those challenges together. 
That is democratic socialism in action. And just as a family uses its combined 
spirit and resources to overcome crisis, so Britain can once again make common 
cause to achieve common good. 
Only a Labour government can give that lead. Only we are committed to such 
concerted action. Only we believe that the whole nation should win and can win. 
That is why Britain will win, with Labour. 
Neil Kinnock



BRITAIN WILL WIN
Britain is crying out for change. Only a Labour government can bring it about.
Mending divisions, building new strengths will need determination and realistic 
priorities. 
Commonsense and the common interest require that the Tory philosophy of 
selfishness and short-term gain is replaced by the democratic socialist 
philosophy of community and caring, of investment in people and in production. 
We must as a priority tackle the immediate tragedy and waste of unemployment. We 
must commit resources to modernising and strengthening the industries and 
services that earn Britain a living. We must ensure the continuity of expansion 
that is necessary for a lasting economic recovery. 
That is our strategy. 
It begins from the understanding that people are Britain's most precious 
resource. It is rooted in the confidence that, with the right skills, the right 
equipment and the backing of a government that is committed to encouraging 
enterprise and innovation, Britain's people can make our country more efficient, 
more competitive and more socially just. 
It is a message of hope and confidence - the alternative to the divisive and 
dictatorial approach of the Conservatives. 
We do not believe that everything could or should be done by government. But we 
know, from our own history and from the example set by our competitors, that 
national economic success cannot be achieved without government. 
Britain will win with a Labour government that invests to enable people to use 
their abilities and to stimulate modern training, research, development, 
production and marketing. These are the ingredients of economic vitality, and 
the foundations of fairness. 



THE PRIORITY PROGRAMME
For our first two years in government we Will concentrate resources on the 
essential tasks of combating unemployment and poverty In the course of that 
action, we will strengthen the health, housing, education, social services and 
crime-fighting services that are vital to social and economic well-being, and 
begin to rebuild our manufacturing industry. 
Clearly, all other programmes that require substantial public finance must take 
lower priority in terms of timescale and public resources. 
THE JOBS PROGRAMME 
Immediately after the election the Labour Government will call together a 
National Economic Summit to assess fully the condition of the economy and set 
the recovery programme in motion - producing the jobs that need to be done by 
people who need to do them in a country that wants them done. 
The Summit will establish the first stage of the National Economic Assessment. 
This will identify the concerted action that will need to be taken by 
government, employers in the private and public sectors and trade unions to 
increase investment, contain inflation and achieve sustained recovery. 
We will reduce unemployment by one million in two years as the first instalment 
in beating mass unemployment. 
Half a million jobs will be generated in private industry and in the public 
sector by the repairing and building of the houses, the hospitals and schools, 
the transport improvements and sewers that the nation needs. This will be 
achieved by public investment and by reducing employers' National Insurance 
contribution in targeted areas. 
Another 360,000 new jobs and training places will be created. These will provide 
new skills for young people and adults - with proper opportunities for women. 
A further 300,000 new jobs will improve the health and education services and 
the neglected community and caring services. The depleted customs services will 
be strengthened in the fight against drugs. The revenue and benefit departments 
will be staffed to increase efficiency. 
We will extend the voluntary Job Release Scheme to men over 60 so that those who 
want to retire early vacate jobs for those who are currently unemployed. This 
could take as many as 160,000 people out of unemployment and into work. 
THE ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMME 
The spread of poverty in the past eight years has stained the whole nation, and 
widened misery and disadvantage amongst old and young. Much of it is the result 
of deliberate government policies. Millions of poor people endure it in despair. 
Millions who are not poor regard it as a disgrace. The Labour government will 
combat poverty directly. 
We will immediately increase the single pension by £5 a week and the pension for 
a married couple by £8, as the first step in re-establishing a link between 
pensions and average earnings or living costs, whichever is the most favourable 
to pensioners. We will begin the abolition of the TV licence fee for pensioners. 

We will provide pensioners on supplementary benefit and others on low incomes 
with a £5 winter premium to help with fuel bills. We will begin discussions with 
the fuel industries with a view to phasing out standing charges. 
We will fully restore the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme as part of the 
process of achieving our objective of a pensions level of one-third average 
earnings for single people and half average earnings for married couples. 
We will restore and increase the death grant. 
We will increase child benefit by £3 a week for all children, raise the 
allowance to the first child by £7.36, and increase one- parent family benefit 
by £2.20. 
We will restore and increase the maternity grant. 
We will start to phase in a new disability income scheme and provide resources 
to give special support to young people with disabilities. Our special Minister 
for the Disabled will be put in charge of our programme for the disabled. 
We will extend the long-term supplementary benefit rate to the long-term 
unemployed. 
We will implement a comprehensive strategy for ending low pay, notably by the 
introduction of a statutory national minimum wage. This will be of particular 
benefit to women workers, and will help lift families out of poverty. 
THE ANTI-CRIME PROGRAMME 
We will introduce crime prevention grants for home-owners and tenants. 
We will work with the police to get more police on the beat. Uniformed police 
officers will be relieved of non-law-and-order tasks which take them away from 
crime prevention, pursuit and detection. 
We will reverse the Tory cuts in the number of those who can claim criminal 
injuries compensation. We will give the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board 
more staff to cut the all-time record 64,000 queue awaiting compensation. 
PAYING FOR THE RECOVERY PROGRAMME 
These immediate programmes will cost £6 billion a year net for the first two 
years. We will pay for them by: 
  Putting directly into generating 300,000 jobs the money that would be used up 
  by the Thatcher government on its 2p income tax bribe. 
  Adopting the same practice as most successful industrial countries and 
  companies, by prudently borrowing £3 billion for useful wealth generating 
  national investment. 
We will reverse the extra tax cuts which the richest 5 per cent have received 
from the Tory government and allocate that money instead to the most needy. We 
will also bring forward other reforms to capital taxation - including the 
introduction of a wealth tax, which, whilst applying to only the wealthiest one 
per cent of the population, will, over the years, bring a significant 
contribution from those in our society best able to pay. 
CHANGES WITHOUT CHARGES 
Apart from legislating where necessary for the Recovery Programme, the new 
Parliament will swiftly enact many other worthwhile measures. These will cost 
little to implement but produce significant improvement in the quality of 
administration, provision and response to the needs of ordinary citizens. 
They will include: 
  A Minister for Women, with a place in the Cabinet. 
  A Freedom of Information Act, to be accompanied by the repeal of Section Two 
  of the Official Secrets Act. 
  Parliamentary scrutiny of the Security Services. 
  Appointment of an Education Ombudsman. 
  Appointment of an Ombudsman for Police Complaints. 
  An Energy Efficiency Agency to co-ordinate conservation programmes for 
  domestic and industrial energy users. 
  A new Ministry of Environmental Protection. 
PROGRAMME FOR A FIVE-YEAR PARLIAMENT 
Labour's Programme for Recovery will be the start of a strategy for a full 
Parliament. We have to halt the decline in manufacturing industry, not only to 
generate jobs and increase our world trade share but to create the wealth to 
finance the rescue and expansion of education, health, housing and the social 
services. 
NEW STRENGTH FOR INDUSTRY
For eight years British industry has been left to drift and decline Our oil 
revenues have been wasted and the City has concentrated upon short-term 
movements of capital at the expense of British manufacturing industry. The huge 
capital outflow of £110 billion since 1979 is ruinous evidence of the Tories' 
lack of concern for the strength of the British economy. 
Labour is committed to rebuilding our industrial base. Our country must make the 
best use of computers and information technology to develop the modern means of 
making a living as the oil runs down and the pressures of technical change and 
international competition intensify. 
We will: 
  Establish a capital repatriation scheme using the tax system to attract and 
  retain British savings and investment in Britain. 
  Set up the British Industrial Investment Bank, with strong bases in Scotland, 
  Wales and English regions, to ensure finance for industry where it is needed, 
  when it is needed and on terms which encourage long term development. 
  Implement a dynamic and properly funded regional policy. This will include the 
  establishment of Regional Development Agencies (starting with the North, 
  North-West, Yorkshire and Humberside); the promotion of local and regional 
  enterprise boards; greater scope for local authorities to participate 
  constructively in economic development; and creating high technology 
  innovation centres throughout Britain. 
  Create a new Ministry of Science and Technology to promote a major increase in 
  research and development.It will co-ordinate the activities and budgets of 
  government departments involved in these areas and will encourage, in 
  conjunction with industry and the scientific community, the full application 
  of science to industrial processes and products. 
  We shall extend social ownership by a variety of means, as set out in Labour's 
  detailed proposals. In particular, we will set up British Enterprise, to take 
  a socially owned stake in high-tech industries and other concerns where public 
  funds are used to strengthen investment. Social ownership of basic utilities 
  like gas and water is vital to ensure that every individual has access to 
  their use and that the companies contribute to Britain's industrial recovery, 
  for instance, by buying British. We shall start by using the exist mg 49 per 
  cent holding in British Telecom to ensure proper influence in their decisions. 
  Private shares in BT and British Gas will be converted into special new 
  securities. These will be bought and sold in the market in the usual way and 
  will carry either a guaranteed return, or dividends linked to the company's 
  growth. 
  Encourage the establishment and success of co-operatives of all forms. 
  Strengthen the Department of Trade and Industry as the spearhead of this new 
  national industrial strategy. 
  Bring in a stronger regulatory framework to ensure honest practice in the City 
  of London and introduce new safeguards on mergers, takeovers and monopolies to 
  protect our national industrial, technological and research and development 
  interests. 
PLAN FOR TRAINING 
For modern, wealth-creating industry we need a well-trained workforce. British 
industry now carries out less than half of the training of our main competitors. 
Labour will therefore establish a national training programme to bring about a 
major advance in the spread and standard of skills. 
For young people we will establish an integrated, high quality Foundation 
Programme that will guarantee for all 16 year olds at least two years of 
education, training and work experience according to their needs. 
The Adult Skillplan will develop lifelong training and education for everyone 
needing to supplement and update skills in work, with particular emphasis given 
to training for women. 
The Jobs, Enterprise and Training Programme will expand existing programmes for 
unemployed people with a guarantee of a job or new skill for the long-term 
unemployed. 
A SENSIBLE ENERGY POLICY 
Efficiency in industry and security in the community both depend on reliable and 
safe supplies of energy available at acceptable cost. Britain's oil reserves 
have a limited life. We have huge reserves of coal which will last for 
centuries. Labour's co-ordinated energy programme will ensure the most sensible 
use of our reserves while protecting our environ ment and stimulating 
employment. 
Labour will initiate a major energy conservation programme and ensure that 
Britain develops the full potential of its coal, oil and gas resources, whilst 
gradually diminishing Britain's dependence upon nuclear energy. 
We will invest substantially in research into, and development of, the renewable 
energy resources as part of the alternative means of power. 
We will not proceed with the building of the proposed Pressurised Water Reactor 
at Sizewell. 
We share national concern about the problem of nuclear waste. We will ensure a 
safe future for Sellafield and develop a new strategy for the monitoring, 
storage and disposal of nuclear waste. 
Labour will take effective steps to improve the service provided by the energy 
industry to energy consumers. These will cover quality of supply, frequency of 
metering, general service arrangements and proper provision for the disabled, 
those in poverty and others with special needs. 
A PROSPEROUS AGRICULTURE 
A more efficient agricultural industry can clearly make a valuable contribution 
to Britain's recovery. We will support good environmental practices in 
agriculture. 
To give Britain's producers the backing they need, the burden of agricultural 
support must be shifted from consumers. The direction of support must be shifted 
away from blanket support for commodities, towards helping the farmers who need 
it most, such as those who work in the hills or on marginal land. To help bring 
this about we will introduce new, long-term programmes for agriculture. 
We will also help new farmers and young farmers by offering farms to rent. And 
we will reverse the cuts in the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service 
and research. 
FREEDOM AND FAIRNESS FOR ALL BRITAIN'S PEOPLE
We are determined to make Britain a fairer and freer society. 
To us and to the majority of the British people a civilised community is one in 
which citizens band together to provide, out of community resources to which all 
contribute, essential services like health, education and pensions that the 
great majority of people can not afford to provide for themselves at time of 
need. 
When the Tories talk of freedom, they mean freedom for the few, for those who 
can afford to buy privilege. What they mean, as their record so plainly shows, 
is more tax cuts for the rich and less help for the poor and for that great 
majority who are neither rich nor poor. 
Labour's objective is to broaden and deepen the liberty of all individuals in 
our community: to free people from poverty, exploitation and fear; to free them 
to realise their full potential; to see that everyone has the liberty to enjoy 
real chances, to make real choices. 
It means collective provision for private use. The British people know that this 
is the most effective way for them to secure their freedom as individuals whilst 
meeting the moral obligations which they feel towards others and seeing that 
fairness is a way of national life, not just a fine word. 
These values are the essence of our democratic socialism. 
INVESTING IN HEALTH 
Labour's proudest achievement is the creation of the National Health Service. 
The Conservatives voted against it then. All who use and value the service know 
only too well how it has been neglected and downgraded by today's Tories. 
Labour will establish the NHS in its rightful place as a high quality service 
for the prevention and treatment of illness, free at the time of use to all who 
need attention, equipped to meet the changing pressures of need as they relate, 
for instance, to an aging population and the requirements of proper provision 
for people suffering from mental illness. 
The biggest single deficiency in the NHS today is the excessively high hospital 
waiting lists which, under the Tories, are increasing year by year. We shall 
speedily reduce them by computerising bed allocation, encouraging more 
consultants to work full-time for the NHS and targeting increased resources 
where waiting lists remain excessive. 
The basis of the NHS is the Family Doctor Service We shall act to improve it, 
with shorter GP patient lists, more convenient surgery hours, more choice and 
information for patients. 
We will develop local family health care teams and more local health centres. 
Women's health care has been seriously neglected. Our Charter for Womens' Health 
will include a network of Well-Women Clinics, and a computerised call and recall 
screening system as a universal service for all women at risk of cervical and 
breast cancer. We shall see that all women have the chance to see a woman doctor 
if they choose. 
We will step up the fight against AIDS by increasing research resources to find 
a vaccine or cure and also ensure adequate resources for the supply of drugs 
capable of arresting the affliction. 
We will improve outpatient and emergency facilities and ambulance services and 
repair and build hospitals. We intend to improve both the quantity and quality 
of services for the National Health. The Tories have increased prescription 
charges twelve fold. We will begin to reduce them with the purpose of securing 
their eventual abolition. 
Labour will ensure that nurses get proper and justified pay increases by right 
and regularly, not exceptionally as pre-election sweeteners. Other hospital 
staff, on whom the effective running of the service depends, must also be fairly 
rewarded as part of the effective health team. 
Privatisation means a Health Service run for profit rather than in the patients' 
interests. Labour will end privatisation in the NHS, relieve the pressure on NHS 
facilities by beginning to phase out pay beds and remove public subsidies to 
private health. 
A CARING COMMUNITY 
The quality of life of the elderly and of disabled people can and must be 
improved by community services. We believe that retirement should be comfortable 
and interesting - a time of freedom and choice, not anxiety and loneliness. We 
believe that disability should not be a disqualification from good standards of 
living and liberty. 
Apart from our commitment to higher pensions and the beginning of a new 
disablement allowance, Labour will support the National Health Service and local 
government in providing more meals on wheels, home helps, chiropody services and 
health visitors. 
We also recognise the immense contribution of the three million people - mostly 
women - who care for their elderly, infirm and disabled relatives at home. They 
save the community huge sums of money, often at considerable sacrifice to 
themselves. The Labour government will consequently provide a carer's allowance 
to give extra help to those who serve their loved ones and our society so well. 
We appreciate and will support voluntary efforts that supplement services which 
are essential to the community. We share the view of many who are engaged in 
such efforts that they achieve best results working in the context of high 
quality public provision. 
EDUCATION FOR BRITAIN'S FUTURE 
Our children are our future. We have a moral and material duty to see that 
children and young people are fully equipped to deal with the complexities and 
challenges which face them now and which they will meet as citizens; parents and 
workers in the future. 
They must be provided with a system of education that enables them to control 
that future. We must see that it is democratic and just, that it is creative and 
compassionate, and that it is one in which they can fully exploit the advantages 
of science and technology with confidence and in safety. 
In pursuit of those objectives, Labour will invest in education so that the 
abilities of all children and adults from all home back grounds and in every 
part of our country are discovered and nourished. 
We will make nursery education available for all three- and four-year-olds whose 
parents want this opportunity. We will make provision for smaller classes and 
ensure that children have up-to-date books, equipment and buildings without 
having to depend on fund-raising for those essentials. 
The entitlement to free school meals and the restoration of nutritional 
standards are, like the strengthening of the school health service, commitments 
which are necessary to safeguard the physical and social wellbeing of growing 
children. 
We will see that teachers are recognised properly as well qualified 
professionals, in their systems of rewards, in the procedures for negotiation of 
their employment conditions and in participation in the development of 
education. 
In addition we shall work with local education authorities to secure a flexible 
but clear core curriculum agreed at national level, a School Standards Council, 
and a new profile of achievement recording individual progress through school 
for all pupils. We will improve links between schools and home so that parents 
and teachers act in partnership to foster the best interests of children. 
We shall foster achievement with other policies such as providing proper funding 
for the GCSE curriculum and examination, for improved supply of teachers and 
equipment for science subjects so that girls as well as boys increase science 
learning. There will be maintenance allowances for 16- to 18-year- olds whose 
family circumstances would other wise impede their further education. 
We will spread the provision of a comprehensive tertiary system of post-school 
education. 
These policies will all contribute to raising standards of performance in 
schools. At the same time as we improve the quality of publicly provided 
education, we shall end the 11 plus everywhere and stop the diverting of 
precious resources that occurs through the Assisted Places Scheme and the public 
subsidies to private schools. 
Labour values the research and teaching contribution made by Britain's higher 
education system. We will ensure that our universities and polytechnics get the 
resources they need to restore and expand the opportunity for all qualified 
young people seeking higher education to secure places. We will ensure that more 
adults have access to higher education to give them the 'second chance' of 
personal development 
We will also invest in research in higher education, in order to provide the 
facilities and opportunities necessary to sustain standards of excellence, to 
retain and attract the highest talents and to encourage the industrial and 
commercial application of research output. 
Education for life through a well-funded adult education service will help to 
provide the means by which rapid economic and social change can be embraced. 
REAL CHOICE IN HOUSING 
Public funding for housing has fallen by 60 per cent during Mrs Thatcher's eight 
years in office. Far fewer homes are being built. Millions of dwellings are in 
serious disrepair. Yet there is record unemployment among building workers. This 
policy is immoral and grossly inefficient. Labour will reverse it. We will also 
improve the quality of housing workmanship and establish a new system of 
registration in the construction industry. 
We will launch a major housebuilding and public and private sector housing 
renovation drive as part of our jobs programme and to combat the problems of bad 
housing, over crowding and homelessness. Owner occupiers will benefit from 
increased availability of improvement grants. 
We will maintain mortgage tax relief, at the standard rate of income tax. To 
assist house-purchasers we will introduce a housing 'log book', giving each 
dwelling's history, condition and construction so that purchasers will know 
exactly what they are buying. This will be transferred with the sale. 
For council tenants, we will maintain the right to buy. Local authorities, at 
present limited by the Tories in using the receipts from council house sales, 
will be required to use these proceeds to invest in new housing. For the 
millions who choose to remain council tenants, we will give a legal right to be 
consulted about rents, charges, repair and improvement programmes. Tenants' 
associations will be given representation in the decision-making structure and a 
say in spending budgets on their estates. 
Groups of tenants who want to take over the running of their homes will have the 
right to set up management co-operatives. 
Leaseholders who own their homes will be given the legal right to acquire their 
freeholds at fair prices and without the costly current impediments to that 
right. Leaseholders in flats will get the legal right to hire and fire the 
managing agents in blocks of flats. They will be empowered to have the 
freeholder's accounts examined by an auditor of their choice and be given the 
legal right to extend their lease. 
Security of tenure will be protected for private tenants. These tenants will be 
given a legal right to get repairs done. 
PROTECTING OUR PEOPLE 
The Thatcher government has broken its promises on law and order. Last year 
4,311,000 crimes were committed in Britain. The clear-up rate fell to 32 per 
cent. Millions of women are scared to go out at night. Many old people lock 
themselves into their homes. Drug trafficking is increasing. 
Labour will take urgent action to make people safer. 
Our crime prevention programme will: 
  Help local councils to implement a Safer Streets policy, with more 
  street-lighting, more caretakers, park-keepers and other public employees 
  whose presence deters crime. 
  Bring in a Safe Estates Policy, assisting councils to provide stronger locks, 
  stouter doors and vandal-proof windows for tenants and home-owners - 
  especially older citizens - who have difficulty in meeting the costs of such 
  security improvements. 
  Introduce a Safer Transport policy, to protect passengers and crews, including 
  better services, especially at night, adequate staffing, better sited bus 
  stops and well-lit stations with alarm buttons. 
  Lay down crime prevention standards for buildings, open spaces and vehicles to 
  combat vandalism and to deter criminals. 
  Combat violence against women - specially domestic violence - by seeing that 
  the laws that already exist against beating and abuse are vigorously enforced. 

Our victim support programme will fund a national network of victim support 
schemes, providing practical help to victims of all crime, ranging from victims 
of rape and child abuse to mugging and burglary victims. 
We shall assist family and support groups in their efforts to work with 
professionals in the health, education and other services and within the 
community to deal with the great and growing problem of drug abuse. 
Locally elected police authorities will be given clear statutory responsibility 
with the police to enforce the law and uphold the Queen's peace. The police 
themselves will remain responsible for all operational matters. 
Fraud in the City of London is a serious crime. Too many get away with it. 
Labour will bring in effective regulation by establishing an independent 
statutory commission. 
MAKING TRAVEL EASIER 
Efficient, inexpensive public transport is essential in any society. Tory 
policies have made travel more difficult by cutting services and pushing up 
fares. Deregulation of buses has brought chaos to many parts of the country both 
in towns and cities and in the rural areas where efficient and cheap public 
transport is so important. 
Labour will invest to co-ordinate and improve bus and rail services, which will 
improve travel and reduce congestion. There will be Local Transport Plans for 
every area. 
Action will be taken to keep fares down. There will be good concessionary fare 
schemes for local travel for pensioners and people with disabilities. 
We shall promote services for those with special needs, such as dial-a-ride and 
taxicard schemes offering cheap travel for the disabled. 
We shall invest to ensure a continuing future for British Rail Engineering as a 
high-quality supplier both for British Rail and to world markets. 
A SAFER ENVIRONMENT 
The countryside and the urban areas all suffer from pollution and the misuse of 
the environment. Labour will establish a Ministry of Environmental Protection to 
take positive action to safeguard the quality and safety of life. 
We will: 
  Set up an Environmental Protection Service and a Wildlife and Countryside 
  Service. 
  Extend the planning system to cover agricultural forestry and water 
  developments requiring them, and industry, to take account of environmental 
  considerations. 
  Invest more in land reclamation and cleaning up, in recycling and 
  conservation, in development of new products, processes and pollution control 
  equipment. This will not only make the country cleaner but will create jobs as 
  well. 
  Take action to deal with acid rain. 
  Stop radio-active discharges into our seas and oppose the dumping of nuclear 
  waste at sea. 
  Provide for better monitoring, inspection and enforcement of pollution 
  control, to cover areas ranging from air pollution to beaches, from hazardous 
  chemicals to food additives, and from water quality to vehicle emissions. 
  Protect green belts and other specially designated areas. 
  Bring in a new Wildlife and Countryside Act and provide for public access to 
  all common land, mountain, moor and heath. 
  End all forms of organised hunting with hounds. Special account will be taken 
  of the conditions applying in National Parks. These changes will not affect 
  shooting and fishing. 
  Update animal protection legislation - for example, to eliminate unnecessary 
  experimenting on live animals. 
STRENGTHENING DEMOCRACY 
We will seek to strengthen parliamentary democracy and introduce state aid for 
political parties, along the lines of the Houghton Report. 
We shall establish a new democratically-elected strategic authority for London 
and consult widely about the most effective regional structure of government and 
administration in England and Wales. 
SCOTLAND 
We shall legislate in the first Parliamentary session to establish a 
democratically-elected Scottish Assembly in Edinburgh. This will have a wide 
range of powers over health, education and housing and over significant aspects 
of industrial and economic policy. It will take responsibility for changes in 
the structure of Scottish local government. 
WALES 
Wales and the Welsh economy will clearly benefit from Labour's programme for 
investment in jobs and vital services. In addition, the Welsh Development Agency 
will be given greater powers and funds and there will be a new Wales Economic 
Planning Council. Welsh agriculture will benefit from our measures to help the 
livestock farmers especially the marginal and hill farmers. 
A separate Arts Council for Wales will be established and the development of the 
use and choice of the Welsh language will be encouraged. 
NORTHERN IRELAND 
Labour's policies for economic renewal are essential to combat the record 
unemployment and social deprivation in Northern Ireland and to encourage the 
economic security which is fundamental to the development of harmony and trust 
in the community. 
We believe in a united Ireland: to be achieved peacefully, democratically, and 
by consent. We consequently support the Anglo-Irish Agreement and its commitment 
that there should be no change in the constitutional position of Northern 
Ireland without the con sent of the majority of the people who live there. No 
group or party will be allowed to exercise a veto on political development, or 
on policies designed to win consent. 
We will combat para-military violence from wherever it comes. We will promote 
discussions aimed at encouraging mutual confidence and eliminating conflict 
whilst ensuring that the respective identities and basic rights of both 
communities will be protected. We will replace present strip-searching practice 
with more effective and acceptable security measures. 
LOCAL DEMOCRACY 
The Tory government has undermined local democracy and plans to continue to 
diminish the importance of votes in local elections. 
It has made huge cuts in rate support grant and imposed financial penalties to 
prevent councils maintaining and improving the quality of essential local 
services. Employment, and sensible and sensitive investment in local communities 
and their services, have been damaged. 
Labour will restore the right of councils to decide their own policies and 
plans, which will be subject to the decisions of local people at annual local 
elections. 
We will halt the cuts in rate support grant and end financial penalties. We will 
make the legal liabilities of councillors similar to those of Ministers and 
Company Directors by ending surcharge and disqualification except for criminal 
offences. 
We will abolish the Rates Act and repeal the legislation which established the 
poll tax in Scotland. 
We will give local authorities the necessary powers to enable them to build on 
existing successful initiatives for enterprise and employment, to develop new 
technologies and to train young people. 
Labour will examine the structure of local government to ensure that it is 
democratic and effective. We will establish a new Quality Commission to ensure 
the spread of 'best practice', efficiency and high standards of local authority 
provision and response to the public. 
NEW LIFE FOR INNER CITIES 
Except where it has turned areas over to speculators so that they can create 
luxury accommodation at astronomical prices, this government has left inner-city 
areas to rot. 
Experience has shown that the Conservatives' City Action Teams have never had 
the means or the purpose of making any real impact on inner city problems. 
Tory cuts in funding and in housing, together with mass unemployment, have 
turned too many of our urban areas into dingy, hopeless places. 
Yet the people who live there, given the chance, have the zest and initiative to 
make these areas thrive socially and economically. 
Labour will launch a drive against inner-city deprivation both as a way of 
generating employment and as a means of making such areas safer and better 
places to live. 
Labour's approach will be to develop the partnership between central and local 
government, with the direct participation of the voluntary and private sectors. 
We will: 
  Give local authorities in key areas the power to declare Public Action Zones. 
  In these areas, local councils will have additional resources and powers to 
  undertake programmes of investment. Land will be identified for housing, jobs 
  and amenities and extra government resources allocated to help with 
  comprehensive regeneration. Local people will be fully consulted about their 
  needs and ideas. 
  Strengthen the Urban Programme and Partnership Schemes. 
  Make Urban Development Grants available for local needs. 
  Increase resources for reclaiming derelict land. 
RURAL AREAS 
Under the Tories, the problems of the rural areas have become steadily more 
serious - the lack of jobs, the poor housing, and the loss of buses, post 
offices, shops and schools. 
Labour will give our rural communities the chance to thrive again. Our policies 
include better public transport, new mobile facilities for health care and 
social services and extra help to keep open local schools and post offices. 
ENHANCING RIGHTS, INCREASING FREEDOM
Under the Conservatives, Britain has become a harsher place. Freedoms built up 
over generations have been weakened or removed. Labour will restore and enhance 
those freedoms in a Britain where life can be more pleasant and fulfilling. 
We believe that positive steps are needed to help women and ethnic minorities 
get a fair deal, and to attain more democracy in the workplace. In addition, we 
will take steps to ensure that homosexuals are not discriminated against. 
WOMEN'S RIGHTS 
More than half of Britain's people - the women of our country - are still denied 
many essential rights. Labour's Ministry for Women will make sure that, in 
framing their policies, all government departments listen and respond to women's 
needs and concerns. 
In particular, women must have the right to work and equal rights at work. In 
addition to our new provision for training opportunities and protection against 
discrimination, Labour will help the large number of women who are part-time 
workers. We will legislate for them to have the same hourly rates, rights to 
sick pay, paid holidays and job security as full-time workers. 
We will give homeworkers the status and rights of employees; introduce effective 
laws for equal pay for work of equal value; provide better-paid leave for 
parents when their child is born; and encourage a shorter, more flexible working 
week. 
DEMOCRACY IN THE WORKPLACE 
Workers' rights have been eroded, or in some cases removed entirely, during the 
Thatcher years. Labour's policy for new rights and responsibilities means 
legislation to foster good industrial relations and democratic participation in 
industry and trade unions. We believe that the law should be used to enlarge, 
not diminish, the freedom of workers to control their environment. 
We will: 
  Replace Tory legislation that gives employers and non-unionists the means to 
  frustrate legitimate trade union activity. New laws will strengthen the legal 
  rights of representation, bargaining and trade unionism that are essential in 
  a modern democracy. 
  Improve the protection available against unfair dismissal. We shall make the 
  legislation apply from the time of employment. Reinstatement will be the 
  normal outcome of a successful finding of unfair treatment. We will ensure 
  that justice is done in cases where miners have been unfairly dismissed. 
  Extend employment protection to all workers, including part-timers. 
  Improve statutory protection in respect of health and safety at work. 
  Restore provision for fair pay, such as the Fair Wages Resolution, Schedule 11 
  of the 1975 Employment Protection Act and the powers of the Wages Councils. 
  Strengthen ACAS to put more emphasis on conciliation and arbitration. 
  Take steps to develop stable and effective negotiating machinery, promote 
  trade union membership and organisation, and encourage union recognition by 
  employers. 
  Restore the right to belong to a trade union to every employee - including 
  those at GCHQ. 
  Ensure that the law guarantees the essential legal freedom of workers and 
  their unions to organise effective industrial action. 
  Provide a statutory framework of measures to underpin the participative rights 
  of union members, for example by laying down general principles for inclusion 
  in union rule books. These will be based on a right for union members to have 
  a secret ballot on decisions relating to strikes, and for the method of 
  election of union executives to be based on a system of secret ballots. 
  In consultation with the TUC, we will establish a new independent tribunal, 
  presided over by a legally-qualified person. This will have the duty of acting 
  on complaints by union members if they consider that these statutory 
  principles have been breached. 
EQUALITY FOR ETHNIC MINORITIES 
All the people of this country - whatever their race, colour or religion - must 
enjoy the full rights of citizenship. 
Our policies for employment, education, housing, health care, local government 
and much else will clearly be of benefit to people of the ethnic minorities as 
they will be to the whole community. 
In addition, Labour will take firm action to promote racial equality, to attack 
racial discrimination and to encourage contract compliance and other positive 
means of ensuring equity for all citizens. We will strengthen the law on public 
order to combat racial hatred and take firm action against the growing menace of 
racial attacks. We will make prosecution easier in order to encourage the 
reporting of offences. 
Labour's policy of firm and fair immigration control will ensure that the law 
does not discriminate on the basis of race, colour or sex. 
A BETTER DEAL FOR CONSUMERS 
When people make a purchase, they often feel they are treated unfairly, or even 
cheated. Labour's Charter for Consumers will provide proper safeguards suited to 
modern conditions. 
There will be firmer protection against unsafe goods. We will make producers 
strictly liable for defective products. 
We will provide easier means of redress for purchasers and stiffer penalties to 
deter illegal practices. 
We will take action to make sure that public bodies respond better to the needs 
and complaints of people who use their services. 
We will bring in a statutory code of advertising practice. There will be powers 
to order the correction of misleading advertisements. 
We will improve access to legal services where necessary. 
There will be more safeguards for customers when companies go bankrupt. 
TOWARDS A FULLER LIFE 
Life is not only work. Labour will make pro vision for the co-ordination and 
development of leisure amenities and the leisure and cultural industries. 
Our Support Sport programme will provide more resources for physical education 
and training through more playing fields and facilities, better equipment and 
well-trained teachers and instructors. We will nourish special talents and 
encourage wider participation in sport. 
We will encourage schools to open up their recreational facilities to the whole 
community and prevent the selling off of school and other sports grounds. 
We will set up a Sports Trust to channel resources into the development of 
community sporting facilities and the attraction of major international sporting 
events to Britain. 
We will establish a Ministry for the Arts and Media with responsibility for the 
arts, crafts, public libraries, museums, film, publishing, the press, the record 
industry, the development of broadcasting and access to it, fashion, design, 
architecture and the heritage. The Home Office will remain responsible for 
regulatory and statutory powers in relation to broadcasting. 
The development of central and local government support for the arts, culture 
and entertainment is essential to the extension of choice, access and 
participation, and to the development of the related industries. 
We will protect the independence of the BBC and the independent broadcasting 
organisations. We reject subscription TV for the BBC and the auctioning of ITV 
franchises. 
We will legislate to ensure that ownership and control of the press and 
broadcasting media are retained by citizens of Britain and to place limits on 
the concentration of owner ship. We will strengthen the Press Council and set up 
a launch fund to assist new publications in order to encourage the diversity 
necessary in a healthy democracy. 
MODERN BRITAIN IN A MODERN WORLD
The globe is torn by strife and oppression A Labour Britain must play its part 
in promoting freedom and reducing conflict. 
Labour will play a full part in the United Nations Organisation and the 
Commonwealth. 
Under the Conservatives, Britain picks and chooses which authoritarian countries 
to condemn and which to befriend. Labour will stand up for freedom wherever it 
is oppressed - whether in Eastern Europe, Latin America, Asia or Africa. 
The Thatcher government has made no real effort to foster freedom in South 
Africa and Namibia. Labour will make the arms embargo complete, halt investment 
and commercial loans and ensure that British measures against apartheid embrace 
those already adopted by the US Congress, the Commonwealth and the EEC. We will 
support the imposition by the UN Security Council of comprehensive mandatory 
economic sanctions and provide help to the Front Line States who bear the brunt 
of South African military and economic attack. 
We uphold the principle that it is wrong for one country to dominate or threaten 
another. We oppose the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. We oppose United States 
intervention in Nicaragua and the financing and arming of the Contra terrorists. 

Labour will actively seek a stable peace in the Middle East which protects the 
security of Israel and recognises the right of Palestinians to 
self-determination. 
Labour supports genuine guarantees for the independence, sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of Cyprus and supports the efforts of the United Nations 
to achieve that. 
We support the human rights movement throughout the world. We champion the 
demand for free trade unions in Poland. We will press the Russians to honour 
their obligations under international human rights agreements. 
International terrorism is a growing menace to liberty and security. Labour is 
firmly committed to strengthening national provision and international 
co-operation in combating and defeating it. 
Labour's aim is to work constructively with our EEC partners to promote economic 
expansion and combat unemployment. However, we will stand up for British 
interests within the European Community and will seek to put an end to the 
abuses and scandals of the Common Agricultural Policy. We shall, like other 
member countries, reject EEC interference with our policy for national recovery 
and renewal. 
DEFENDING OUR COUNTRY 
Labour has a proud record of acting in defence of Britain. It was a Labour 
government which helped to establish the North Atlantic Alliance. It was a 
Labour government which in the 1970s put resources into rebuilding the Royal 
Navy and equipping the Royal Air Force with the most up-to-date aircraft. 
At the same time, Labour has always linked necessary defence with the need to 
reduce hostility between East and West. We must be alert in protecting our 
country and equally alert in helping to keep away the scourge of war and nuclear 
destruction. 
The incoming Labour government will maintain that record of effective defence 
whilst working to lower international tension, fear and distrust. 
Labour's defence policy is based squarely and firmly on Britain's membership of 
NATO. We are determined to make the most useful possible contribution to the 
alliance. We can best do that by concentrating our resources on the non-nuclear 
needs of our army, navy and air force. 
The Polaris system of nuclear delivery is ageing and will soon be obsolete. The 
Tories are buying the expensive American Trident system - a policy which 
increases nuclear armament without increasing security and, at the same time, 
diminishes our effective defences. Trident's cost of up to £10 billion will take 
up so much of our defence budget as to deny modern and necessary equipment to 
our front line forces. Indeed, this process is already happening. 
Labour rejects this dishonest and expensive policy. We say that it is time to 
end the nuclear pretence and to ensure a rational conventional defence policy 
for Britain. 
So Labour will decommission the obsolescent Polaris system. We will cancel 
Trident and use the money saved to pay for those improvements for our army, navy 
and airforce which are vital for the defence of our country and to fulfil our 
role in NATO. We will maintain a 50-frigate and destroyer navy. We will play a 
full part in the development of the European Fighter Aircraft. We will invest in 
the best up-to-date equipment for the British Army of the Rhine. 
That commitment to conventional defence will be based wherever possible on 
buying British-made rather than foreign equipment. This policy will provide 
greater security for workers in our vital industries like aerospace, 
shipbuilding and engineering where jobs are in danger from the reductions which 
the Tories are making in conventional defence. 
We have always recognised that a properly negotiated and monitored international 
agreement to remove nuclear weapons from European soil would provide the most 
effective guarantee against the horrors of nuclear war. It would be the most 
significant step towards an eventual worldwide renunciation of, and ban upon, 
nuclear weapons. That is why we were the first to propose to the superpowers the 
zero option in respect of intermediate nuclear weapons. 
Labour therefore strongly supports the talks between the United States and 
Soviet governments aimed at reducing nuclear armaments. Success in these efforts 
to negotiate the removal of all intermediate nuclear missiles in Europe would be 
warmly welcomed. It would mean the removal of America's Cruise missiles here in 
Britain and in the rest of Europe, as well as Pershing IIs in Germany and the 
Soviet SS20s and other shorter-range missiles. 
We naturally, therefore, want to assist that process in every way possible. If, 
however, it should fail we shall, after consultation, inform the Americans that 
we wish them to remove their cruise missiles and other nuclear weapons from 
Britain. We would then become the ninth - of the sixteen NATO members - which do 
not have US nuclear weapons on their territory. This change would, of course, 
not affect the other US, British and joint defence and early warning systems in 
the United Kingdom. 
We will oppose the extension of the arms race into outer space and will seek an 
international agreement to abolish chemical weapons. 
THE WAR WE MUST FIGHT 
The world is aware, as never before, of the horrors of famine and poverty in 
many countries. A Labour Britain will play its full part in defeating these 
scourges. 
We will set up a Department of Overseas Development and Co-operation, headed by 
a Cabinet Minister. We will double Britain's aid budget in order to achieve the 
United Nations' target of 0.7 per cent of national income within five years. We 
will restore funding for development education. We will give greater support to 
voluntary agencies. We will promote international action to lift the burden of 
Third World debt and improve the trading conditions of the developing countries. 

In all of our policies for making our aid commitment more effective we shall 
consult the agencies and the men and women of the communities that use the aid 
to help to win their freedom from want and poverty. 
BRITAIN WILL WIN WITH LABOUR
On June 11, the people of Britain have the opportunity to put behind them the 
bleak years of Thatcherism and to give our country a fresh start Labour's plans, 
carefully costed, prudently programmed, can provide that start. 
To go on under Toryism is to accept lower expectations and narrower horizons: it 
is to surrender to national decline and national division. 
We must not shackle ourselves or burden our children with that future of 
failure. Together, we can be successful not just in material and economic terms, 
though these are vitally important, but also in terms of our sense of purpose, 
our freedom, independence and confidence. 
That success can come only when the nation is restored to strength and unity in 
their fullest sense. 
Labour has the policies to generate efficient production and secure high 
standards of justice. Labour has the vision and commitment to stimulate the 
energies, the skills and the will to succeed of the British people. 
In our precious democratic tradition, a general election passes power back from 
Parliament to the people. We urge the people to use their power in their own 
interests, their families' interests, their country's interests. 
Britain will win with Labour.


This version excludes the separate marginal annotations intended to highlight 
certain proposals. Instead, the relevant section of the main text has been 
emboldened.

British Labour Party election manifesto: 1992Labour Party Manifesto 1992 
It's time to get Britain working again


Winter ending 
'A cold coming we had of it'
huddled together in cardboard cities,
crouched over shared books in leaking classrooms,
crammed into peeling waiting-rooms,
ice stamped into crazy-paving
round polluted streams.
Winter ending:
paintings, poems bud hesitantly,
tentative chords behind boarded facades;
factories open like daffodils,
trains flex frozen rheumatic joints,
computer-screens blink on
in the sudden daylight.
As the last cardboard boxes
are swept away beneath busy bridges,
the cold blue landscape of winter
suddenly alive with bright red roses. 
Adrian Henri
March 1992



Contents 
Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Neil Kinnock
Leader of the Labour Party
1. Immediate action for national recovery
2. Building a strong economy
3. Modernising the National Health Service
4. Raising standards in our schools
5. The best future for families
6. A modern democracy
7. Britain in a new world


Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Neil Kinnock
Leader of the Labour Party 
This general election is a choice between a Conservative government paralysed by 
recession, and a Labour government determined to get on with building recovery.
Gripped by the longest recession since the war, Britain needs a government with 
a clear sense of direction and purpose. A government with the people and the 
policies to get Britain working again and to achieve sustained recovery - 
strength with staying power. 
Labour will be such a government.
But this election is not only a choice between policies, important though both 
are. It is also a choice between values.
At the core of our convictions is belief in individual liberty. 
We therefore believe:
First, that for liberty to have real meaning the standards of community 
provision must be high and access to that provision must be wide.
Second, that those rights of the individual must, like all others in a free 
society, belong to all men and women of every age, class and ethnic origin and 
be balanced by responsibilities of fair contribution and law-abiding conduct.
Third, that for rights and responsibilities to be exercised fully and fairly, 
government in Britain as in other industrialised democracies, must work to build 
prosperity by properly supporting research, innovation, the improvement of 
skills, the infrastructure and long-term industrial development.
Our vision for Britain is founded on these values. Guided by them, we will make 
our country more competitive, creative, and just; more secure against crime, 
aggression and environmental danger. We want government to serve the whole 
nation - using its power to realise this vision.
Labour will be such a government.
These are our convictions and we will work to fulfil them. They are also 
down-to-earth aims - essential objectives in a country hit by recession, 
suffering run-down public services and facing the intensifying pressures of 
European and global economic competition. 
Ml of those realities require that the government provides: a stable economic 
environment; education and training that fosters the abilities of all young 
people and adults; a firm emphasis on productive investment in both the public 
and private sectors. 
Labour will implement and maintain those policies. They are vital for 
prosperity, for consistently low inflation and for continuous improvement in 
economic performance and living standards. They are also fundamental to 
improving the quality and quantity of provision in health and social services, 
and to combating poverty We have absolute commitment to a high-quality National 
Health Service, free at time of need and not fractured and weakened by 
underfunding and a commercialised contract system. We will get on with 
fulfilling that commitment from the moment of our election - by strengthening 
and modernising the NHS, by extending care in the community and by establishing 
the National Health Initiative to prevent illness.
Our pledges to increase the income of pensioners and families with children will 
urgently be fulfilled. Our undertakings to stop the perpetual experiments in 
schools and to raise standards of investment and achievement in education will 
be kept in full. 
These policies - like those to increase house-building, improve transport and 
protect the environment - are not only important to the well-being of the 
British people now. They are vital preparations for the future. In that future, 
we are determined that Britain will be a leader in the New Europe, setting 
higher standards and not surrendering influence by opting out. We have 
confidence in our country and in the qualities and potential of its people. We 
want to nourish their artistic, scientific, sporting and other abilities. And we 
want to enhance their democratic power too. We shall therefore make 
constitutional and other changes that will give renewed vitality to our 
democracy We shall empower people as citizens and as consumers of public and 
private services. We 
will strengthen equality before the law and equality of opportunity for the 
majority of the population -women. Neither their legal status nor their chances 
in education, training and employment are full or free. We will ensure that the 
barriers to fairness are removed.
These policies, like many others, manifest our practical commitment to freedom. 
That purpose is not confined to the shores of our country. In an age where 
liberty has made great advances in the world, there is still conflict, 
instability and want, causing great misery and inhibiting the peace and 
co-operation which we want to help to build. We shall, therefore ensure that our 
country has the defence capacity, the strength of alliance and the peace-making 
commitment necessary to safeguard the United Kingdom, to participate in 
international negotiations for disarmament, to deter aggression and to 
contribute to constructing a New World Order, now feasible through the 
strengthened United Nations.
In our relations with the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe as well 
as with the poverty-stricken peoples of the South, we will work from the 
principle that political freedom needs the sure foundation of economic security. 
In this increasingly inter-dependent world there are no distant crises. The 
Labour government will therefore, as a matter of moral obligation and in the 
material interests of our country, foster the development and trade 
relationships necessary for the advance of economic security, political 
democracy and respect for human rights.
The United Kingdom has been through 13 years in which unemployment has more than 
doubled, irreplaceable assets have been wasted, markets at home and abroad have 
been lost, manufacturing investment has fallen, poverty has increased, the crime 
rate has rocketed, and talents have been neglected.
Now our country faces clear alternatives.
A Conservative government would mean a repeat of the same, stale policies which 
brought economic insecurity, privatised and underfunded public services and 
increased social division. The Conservatives have no policies which would mean 
sustained recovery, higher health care or improved educational standards. The 
arrogance remains which brought us the poll tax, centralisation in Britain and 
isolation in Europe.
If they can't get it right in 13 years, they never will.
The Labour government will mean a fresh start for Britain. It will mean strong 
and continued emphasis on investment for economic strength. It will mean action 
to help families, fair taxation, incentives for enterprise and support for 
essential community services.
It will mean greater freedom, securitv and opportunity. It will mean change for 
the better.
It's time to make that change.
It's time for Labour. 



Immediate action for national recovery
Britain faces a huge task of national reconstruction. From day one, the new 
government must start to get Britain working again. It must get the economy out 
of recession, it must lay foundations for the future. Recovery must be based on 
investment, for only investment will create lasting prosperity. 
Today. millions of people fear losing their job, their home or their business. 
The new Labour government's National Recovery Programme will start to remove 
that fear with immediate action on investment. jobs and training. It will combat 
recession now and build sustained and sustainable recovery for the future. 
Britain's economic problems are deep-seated. We will not be able to do at once 
everything that we would like to do. But we will get down to business right 
away. And as with any properly-run business. our immediate programme will be 
part of a strategy for long-term success. 
Action for industry 
1 We will provide enhanced capital allowances to encourage companies immediately 
to bring forward manufacturing investment in new machinery and plant, innovation 
and design. This will last for a limited period.
2. We will introducc an investment tax incentive tailored to the special needs 
of small businesses.
3. We will immediately begin the phased release of receipts from the sale of 
council houses land and property receipts to allow local authorities to build 
new homes and improve old ones. More building workers in the recession-savaged 
construction and building supply industries will be employed and more families 
rehoused. Equivalent arrangements will be made in Scotland.
4. We will allow British Rail to proceed with a leasing scheme of 188 new 
Networker trains on the North Kent line - the first step in securing private 
investment to help modernise Britain's railways and protect our environment.
Action for jobs 
5. Housing investment will generate jobs. We will also establish a work 
programme combining three days a week work for the unemployed - paid at the 
proper rate - with two days' training and job seeking. This will benefit the 
community and ensure that unemployed people are offered a range of employment 
and training opportunities. The programme which can be quickly and easily 
established will allow us to start bringing down unemployment immediately. Our 
aim is to prevent long-term unemployment rather than just trying to cope with it 
after it has occurred
Action for skills and schools 
6. We will restore last year's training cuts which caused so much damage to 
training for young people and the unemployed. We will establish a new 
cash-limited Skills for the 90s fund with an initial budget of £300 million, to 
upgrade the training of those in work. Investment will be targeted particularly 
at areas of skill shortages and will
give people who are now unskilled the chance to acquire basic skills.
7. Over the next 22 months, additional resources of at least £600 million will 
be available for investment in education. Amongst other projects, this will help 
to tackle equipment shortages and the backlog of school repairs.
Action for the NHS 
Over the next 22 months. additional at least £1 billion will be available for 
investment in the National Health Service. This will help the NHS to make real 
advances in care and treatment. 
Action for children 
9. We will start to increase nursery education places for three and four year 
olds by making sure that local councils actually use the money they receive for 
nursery education to create new places and by switching capital funds
earmarked for the City Technology College programmes. This will lead to the 
rapid creation of 25,000 new places.
10. We will extend the exemption from tax which applies to workplace nurseries 
to all forms of employer assistance with childcare. 
Getting results 
Every action we propose makes sense by itself. Together our proposals add up to 
a co-ordinated programme for recovery.
By investing in house-building and repairs, we start to rehouse homeless people.
By investing in public transport, we start to transform commuters' lives and 
create a cleaner environment.
By investing in the NHS, we offer new security to the patients and the public.
By investing in education we nourish the talents of children and lay the basis 
for future success.
With each step we employ more workers in industries from construction and 
computer software to high-tech engineering printing and publishing. We enable 
businesses to thrive. We save taxpayers' money on benefits. We transform 
unemployment claimants into employed contributors. 
Labour's programme for national recovery will this year help bring Britain out 
of recession. Public investment will modernise services help business and 
industry and stimulate private investment. It will make you and your family 
better off. 
Building a strong economy
Labour's economic policy rests on one simple, commonsense fact. The only way for 
Britain to build a strong economy is to make the goods and services which people 
at home and abroad want to buy 
Britain is in a race for economic survival and success. Faced with intense 
competition, companies and countries can succeed only by constantly improving 
their performance. Every employee in every enterprise must be involved in a new 
partnership so that trained and talented people can use the most modern 
technologies to create top-quality products.
But none of this will happen with a government that believes that the best thing 
is to do nothing. Three thousand men and women have lost their jobs on every 
working day since John Major became Prime Minister. Every week 900 businesses go 
bankrupt. Every dav 200 families lose their homes. 
The Conservatives have created the longest recession for 60 years. They have no 
idea how to get us out of it and even less idea how to stay out of it. Britain 
needs a Labour government which will back British industry in the way our 
competitors back theirs. 
A government which business can do business with 
Modern government has a strategic role not to replace the market but to ensure 
that the market works properly. Other competitors in Europe and elsewhere 
recognise that industrial policy must be at the heart of economic policy. It is 
the government's responsibility to create the conditions for enterprise to 
thrive.
Business needs sustained and balanced growth, with stable exchange rates, steady 
and competitive interest rates and low inflation. We will deliver them.
Business must have a high level of education science and skills. Incentives for 
high-tech investment. Modern transport.
Strong regional economies for new developments. We will deliver them. 
We will keep prices down 
Inflation has been suppressed by recession. But it has not been cured.
To curb inflation. Labour will maintain the value of the pound within the 
European Exchange Rate Mechanism. We will manage credit sensibly. We will stop 
excessive price rises in water, electricity, telephones, transport and NHS 
prescriptions.
The only way to defeat inflation in the medium term is to raise productivity 
substantially. By promoting investment and improving skills we will tackle the 
underlying causes of inflation. 
We will introduce fair taxes 
Attacking poverty is an essential component of Labour's programme for national 
recovery and prosperity. The most effective way to reduce poverty quickly is to 
increase child benefit and pensions and take low-paid people out of taxation. To 
achieve these goals, we will reform the national insurance and income tax 
system.
We will increase child benefit to £9.95 a week for all children with the full 
value going to every family. This measure will benefit seven million families 
and is worth £127.40 a year to a family with two children.
We will increase the basic retirement pension by an extra £5 a week for a single 
person and £8 for a married couple. All pensioners will receive the full 
increase which will also go to widows and others on benefits linked by statute 
to the basic pension level. Twelve million people will benefit.
We will abolish the two per cent national insurance contribution on earnings 
under £54 a week - effectively a £56 annual entry fee into the national 
insurance system.
At present employees earning less than
£405 a week pay contributions on all their earnings, while above that level no 
contributions are paid at all. This is an unfair anomaly in our tax structure. 
The ceiling on contributions will therefore be abolished.
We will take 740,000 taxpayers out of taxation altogether by increasing the 
personal allowance and wife's earned income allowance by more than inflation. 
Married couples will have the option of splitting the married couple's allowance 
between them as they choose.
The basic rate of tax will remain unchanged at 25 per cent, as will the 40 per 
cent rate. A new top rate income tax of 50 per cent will apply to individuals 
with an income of at least £40,000 this year.
Labour's tax and benefit changes are self-financing. They are fair. And they 
will make every individual employee on earnings up to at least £22,000 a year 
better off. 
We will reform decision-making 
Britain urgently needs a better way of making economic decisions. Government 
must decide at the same time how much to spend and how to pay for spending. The 
Budget should decide both.
Every autumn, we will make a State of the Nation report on the British economy. 
Our national economic assessment will then allow employers, trade unions and 
other social partners to consider Britain's competitiveness and the competing 
claims on national output. These considerations will be an important influence 
on collective bargaining.
In order to provide honest information about the state of the British economy, 
we will make the Central Statistical Office independent and free from political 
interference.
We will halt the deterioration which has taken place in the pay and conditions 
of many public service workers - often through pay settlements which have been 
arbitrarily imposed upon them. We will seek fairer and more rational ways of 
determining public sector pay within clearly defined budget limits.
We will cut unemployment 
We are determined to make a swift reduction in unemployment and have explained 
in our NationaI Recovery Programme just how this will be done. It includes 
immediate action for unemployed people, as well as direct investment - for 
instance, in construction - to create thousands of new jobs.
Steady and sustained economic growth will generate jobs that last. Better 
training will help people get back to work.
Unemployment must be tackled by the European Community as a whole. We will use 
our influence in Europe to secure the necessary policies for co-ordinated 
growth.

We will modernise Britain's industries 
It is time to rebuild Britain's industrial strength. For lasting recovery, 
Britain needs a modern industrial policy designed to build skills, upgrade 
technology, encourage industry in every region and expand exports.
An Investment Decade for Britain will start with the immediate introduction of 
enhanced investment allowances (see page 9). We will help Britain's 
high-technology industries with a 25% tax credit for additional investment in
research and development. Small firms will be assisted with a new investment 
scheme, combining a cash-limited fund for new investments with tax incentives 
tailored to heir special needs.
Britain's industrial future depends on transforming our inventive genius into 
manufacturing strength. Labour will work with industry to establish British 
Technology Enterprise and create Technology Trusts throughout Britain, building 
bridges between industries and universities and helping firms turn good ideas 
into commercial products. We will encourage the development of the most modern 
telecommunications networks.
Labour's Minister for Science will develop a national strategy to promote 
high-quality science and technology, so that Britain can better anticipate and 
respond to the challenges of the future. 
All over the world, industries face unprecedented environmental challenges. We 
will support new research into
environmentally-friendly technologies and launch a Great Environment Exhibition 
to publicise and to promote sales of the cleanest British technologies. 
We will strengthen our regional economies 
We will establish new Regional Development Agencies in England, strengthen 
Scottish Enterprise and the Welsh Development Agency and modernise regional 
incentives. Regional agencies will become powerhouses for industrial 
development, encouraging investment, technology and skills. The Scottish 
Parliament will have a vital role in building the competitive strength of the 
Scottish economy. Our new Welsh Assembly will also have important economic 
responsibilities. 
Labour's National Investment Bank, operating on strictly commercial lines, will 
bring public and private sector together to invest in long-term regional and 
national infrastructure projects.
Small and growing businesses will have a new deal. As well as the lowest 
possible interest rates, they need the backing on which their competitors can 
rely in France and Germany. Labour will establish a network of one-stop advice 
centres providing them with access to high-quality specialist assistance.
We will give special attention to the establishment of small businesses by 
women, and members of the ethnic minority communities, who often face 
difficulties raising venture capital.
Under the Conservatives, Britain has moved from manufacturing trade surplus to 
manufacturing trade deficit. The recent privatisation of the Export Credit 
Guarantee Department can only do further damage. Labour will create modern 
export services for the nation and the regions. 
We will invest in modern transport 
Commuters and companies need fast, safe transport Labour will act to make sure 
they get it. It is absurd that French Railways can raise funds for new 
investment in the City of London, when British Rail is not allowed to do so. We 
will remove these restrictions. Leasing schemes will allow large-scale 
investments to be financed at relatively little
cost to the public sector borrowing requirement.
Private finance will also be mobilised for a high-speed rail network which will 
eventually link every region to the Channel Tunnel with proper environmental 
safeguards. 
We will improve energy supplies 
Families, commerce and industry need heat, light and power at prices they, can 
afford. Britain is well placed with reserves of coal, oil and gas which must be 
husbanded in a national energy policy to balance the needs of the present with 
those of the future. We will encourage enhanced recovery of oil from the North 
Sea and avoid becoming too dependent in on imported fuel. We will meet our 
international obligations to reduce harmful chimney emissions. 
We will restore public control of the National Grid and give it new duties and 
powers to ensure the long-term security of electricity supplies. We will secure 
the long-term future of the coal industry by reducing imports, stopping the 
'dash for gas' and reining back on open-casting. We will retain the Department 
of Energy and move its petroleum engineering directorate to Aberdeen. We will 
require the energy companies to invest in R&D, and encourage the development of 
clean-burn coal technology. 
We will invest in people at work 
The key to a successful modern economy is a well-educated and motivated 
workforce. We cannot compete on the basis of low educational standards or poor 
working conditions. Britain's future must be high skill, high wage and high 
tech.
Two things are needed: a training revolution to modernise people's skills, and 
rights for employees to fair treatment at work.
We will offer unemployed people a range of employment and training 
opportunities. Our aim is to ensure that anyone who is unemployed for more than 
six months has a choice of job experience or training. We will also help the 
people often left out of good training opportunities, including the disabled, 
women returning after caring for children, and those with special educational 
needs.
Expanded childcare will help women return to work and undertake training. A 
critical task is to upgrade the skills of people in work. Training and 
Enterprise Councils will be retained, reformed and made more broadly 
representative of their local communities and given stable budgets.
Instead of the present series of piecemeal initiatives we will establish a 
coherent national training policy to meet the needs of industry and provide 
people with real equal opportunities at work. All employers, except for very 
small businesses, will be obliged to invest a minimum amount on training their 
workforce or make a contribution to the local or national training effort. 
Training will be a real partnership between government and industry, not an 
excuse to shift all the burden onto employers.
We will transform the Careers Service to make careers advice available to 
everyone, young or old, employed or unemployed.
Britain cannot get the best performance from our employees by giving them the 
worst treatment. There will be a fair framework of law for both employers and 
unions. There will be no return to the trade union legislation of the 1970s. 
Ballots before strikes and for union elections will stay. There will be no mass 
or flying pickets. But our individual employees are entitled to be treated at 
least as fairly as their colleagues in Europe.
We will opt in to the Social Chapter of the new European Treaty and introduce 
employment standards common in successful economies, including the best health 
and safety legislation. The existing protection provided for people engaged in 
especially hazardous work will be retained.
Women and men must be able to care for their family as well as earn a living. We 
will give all employees equal rights and status under the law, whether they are 
full-time or part-time, permanent or temporary. We aim to guarantee every woman 
in employment the right to 14 weeks' maternity leave on full pay, and to give 
fathers paternity leave, bringing Britain into line with the better provision 
elsewhere in the European Community.
Employees will have new rights to be consulted and informed about decisions 
which affect them, as well as the right to union membership and representation. 
We will restore union rights at GCHQ. Anti-discrimination law will be 
strengthened and we will consider as part of that law outlawing discrimination 
in employment on the grounds of age. 
Britain's Wages Councils set minimum wages for about 2.5 million people. But 
there is no minimum wage for all employees. We will end the scandal of poverty 
pay and bring Britain into line with the rest of Europe by introducing a 
statutory minimum wage of £3.4O an hour. This is a major but long overdue reform 
which will benefit around four million low-paid people, 80 per cent of whom are 
women. We will consult widely to ensure smooth implementation. 
We will promote a stake for employees 
Employees should have the opportunity to own collectively a significant stake in 
the company for which they work, through a democratic Employee Share Ownership 
Plan (ESOP) or a co-operative. We will strengthen support for such schemes and 
consult about the possibility of creating a new tax incentive to encourage 
companies to establish or extend an ESOP or set up a co-operative.
Recent pension fund scandals have shown how right Labour has been to call for 
stronger legal protection. We will reform the law so that pension funds belong 
to their members, not to employers. Half of the pension trustees will be 
employees, with an independent chairman, and pensioners will be represented. 
Modernising the National Health Service
This election will decide the future of the NHS. Indeed, it will decide whether 
or not we continue to have a NHS of the kind that the British people want. The 
Conservatives would continue to commercialise and privatise the NHS until it is 
run as just another business. With Labour, it will be modernised and restored as 
a high-quality public service, accountable to the community. 
Labour will stop the privatisation of the NHS and return opted-out hospitals and 
other services to the local NHS. We will halt the commercial market which is 
creating a two-tier health service. 
Our commitment to the NHS 
For a decade, the Conservatives have persistently underfunded the health 
service. It may well take at least the lifetime of a Parliament to put things 
right, but Labour will start immediately. Instead of cutting income tax, we will 
make additional resources of at least £1 billion available for investment in the 
NHS over the next 22 months. Each year thereafter, we will continue to tackle 
underfunding. Unlike the Conservatives, we ill not impose any new health 
charges.
Labour will recognise the additional claims on the NHS from the growing number 
of very elderly people and the development of medical technology and knowledge. 
We will retain the pay review bodies. We will not cheat
health authorities by agreeing pay awards which are not fully funded and leaving 
managers to bridge the gap by cutting patient care. We will invest in the 
modernisation of our hospitals and tackle the backlog of repairs and 
maintenance.
We will also launch a new programme to invest £60 million in the modernisation 
of Britain's cancer services, using the resources we will save by scrapping the 
Conservatives' tax handout on private medical insurance. Within our overall 
budget, we will tackle the shortage of intensive care beds with a special 
programme providing an additional £25 million to expand this life-saving 
service. 
A healthy Britain 
Labour will launch a National Health Initiative to promote physical and mental 
health from birth to old age. This initiative will be led by the Department of 
Health and Community Care and by a new Cabinet committee that will cut through 
departmental boundaries. 
We will set new targets to cut the inequalities in health between social classes 
and ethnic groups. Our Health Initiative will set targets for better health, 
backed by effective action. We will, for instance: 
  strengthen screening by restoring the free eye test; 
  cut cancer by banning tobacco advertising; 
  encourage healthy diets by introducing clearer food labeling; 
  promote health at work by creating a modern occupational health service within 
  the NHS. 
GPs have a vital role to play in health promotion. We will increase the time 
they have for each patient by reversing the financial pressures to take on too 
many patients. We will make sure every community has access to dentists, with 
the resources to provide full NHS cover we will and restore the free dental 
check.
By improving family planning services, we will reduce unwanted pregnancies and 
help achieve our target of cutting the number of abortions by at least a 
quarter. We will ensure that access to abortion is equally available in every 
region. 
A modern NHS 
We will create a modern, efficient NHS with incentives to improve performance - 
but without the queue-jumping and waste created by a market in health care.
We will provide more services through local health centres and other community 
settings. We will give GPs the power to insist on improvements in service to all 
the patients in a neighbourhood. 
We will give the outcome of treatment the same importance as the throughput of 
treatment. Our new Health Quality Commission will monitor the quality of care 
and raise standards.
The continuing care of very elderly and chronically sick patients will be a 
higher priority. We will halt the reduction in NHS services for long-term care 
and community health services which support elderly and disabled patients at 
home
To achieve this change of direction, we will negotiate Performance Agreements 
with each health authority and back them with an Incentive Fund to reward 
authorities which perform well. These agreements will set local targets which 
reflect local priorities, for instance, to cut waiting lists or switch mental 
health services into the community. Hospital to managers, who will be 
accountable for meeting their targets, will otherwise be given maximum freedom 
of decision making.
We will create new community health authorities, representative of local people, 
which bring together both GP services and hospital care. 
A first-class service to patients 
In Labour's health service, power will belong to patients, not accountants. We 
will restore the right of patients to be treated in the hospital of their 
choice. Women will have the right to be seen by a woman GP and we will encourage 
the development of well women clinics. Ethnic minorities will have the right to 
obtain the diet required by their religious
beliefs.
We will set four new standards for a better service to: 
  cut cancelled operations; 
  improve cleanliness in hospitals; 
  make it easier to phone for an ambulance; 
  increase early admissions from waiting lists. 
As part of our commitment to a quality service to patients, we will end 
compulsory competitive tendering for hospital support services, which has driven 
down standards of cleanliness and catering. 
We will invest £25 million from within our overall budget to purchase several 
hundred more new, fully-equipped ambulances. 
A community service 
Labour will expand the services which elderly people and their carers need for 
long-term support in the community, such as home helps, care assistants and 
community services. Our Department of Health and Community Care, with a new 
Minister of State for Community Care, will develop a high-quality programme of 
community care which responds to what users want.
We will introduce a new earmarked grant for community care which will support 
the work of Labour councils in providing care for people at home, and oblige 
Conservative councils to use the grant to improve those services. We will end 
the pressure on councils to privatise their residential homes by providing 
funding for local authorities equivalent to the benefits paid to private homes. 
We will insist that the first call on income from the sale of mental health 
hospitals is the provision of better accommodation and services in the community 
for mental health users and people with learning disabilities. We will end the 
neglect that has allowed some former patients to end up sleeping rough and led 
to others being placed on remand. Labour will ensure that these services are in 
place before patients who will benefit from life in the community are 
transferred out of long-term hospital care. 
Raising standards in our schools
Good education is the best investment in Britain's future. All girls and boys, 
from every background, must be able to discover their talents and fulfil their 
potential. 
We want every child to get qualifications that count. We need safe, disciplined 
schools, where professional teachers work closely with parents. Learning must 
become a lifetime opportunity, with new chances to update skills at work.
That is our vision of a well-educated Britain.
But, under the Conservatives, Britain today invests a smaller share of our 
national wealth in education than in 1979. More and more parents are now being 
forced to pay for essentials in a system which should be free.
Labour will modernise Britain's schools. Over the next 22 months, additional 
resources of at least £600 million will be made available for investment in 
education. We will then continue steadily to increase the share of Britain's 
national wealth invested in education. 
We will offer nursery education to three and four year olds 
By the end of the decade, all three and four year o1ds will have the opportunity 
of nursery education if their parents so wish. 
Within six months, every local education authority will have to set targets for 
steadily increasing nursery and childcare services. Childhood Partnerships 
between councils, parents, schools, local businesses and community groups will 
help extend a wide range of childcare and nursery education services.
The immediate investment in childcare described earlier (see page 10) is only 
the beginning. Our Ministry for Women will have central role in helping to 
develop a nationwide childcare strategy, including out-of-school and holiday 
provision as well as care for younger children. 
We will raise standards in our schools 
By investing in better teaching, smaller classes and modern books and equipment 
we will raise education standards.
Teachers will be guaranteed a proper salary and career structure. A General 
Teaching Council for England and Wales will help them achieve the highest 
professional standards. Higher quality training will be followed by proper 
support for newly-qualified teachers. A national in-service training programme 
will ensure that all teachers are fully qualified in the subject they are 
teaching. 
Within 12 months, we will end the scandal of primary school classes of over 40 
children. We will then establish and steadily reduce maximum limits on class 
sizes, until no primary school child is taught in a class of more than 30.
To make sure that children are reading by the age of seven, we will create a 
national Reading Standards Programme, with a national Reading Recovery Programme 
to help those in difficult. £20 million will be invested in reading recovery in 
the first year. National tests must provide the information needed to help 
pupils, and to judge schools' effectiveness, without wasting good teaching time. 
Children with special needs or special abilities will receive the extra 
attention they deserve.
Nine out of ten secondary school children are in comprehensive schools. We will 
end selection at 11 where it still exists. We will introduce a fairer system for 
all school reorganisations, with independent public enquiries. We will phase out 
the Assisted Places scheme (without affecting pupils currently on a place, or 
offered one from September 1992) and redirect the savings to meet wider 
educational needs.
Because the national curriculum cannot be properly taught without new textbooks, 
we will earmark funds for class and library books. Every child needs a good 
grounding in science and technology. We will introduce a programme to improve 
equipment and laboratories. We will start to tackle the backlog of school 
repairs. For instance, we will invest £30 million to ensure that within 12 
months, no child has to use an outside lavatory. 
Guaranteed standards 
Conservative plans to privatise the schools' inspectorate will be scrapped Our 
Education Standards Commission, together with her Majesty's Inspectors, will 
monitor the performance of every school. If a school is under-performing, the 
commission, which will be answerable to Parliament, will have the powers to 
ensure that it is brought up to standard.
National Awards, similar to the Queen's Award for Industry, will encourage 
excellence in schools. We will reform the Conservatives' scheme for the local 
management of schools. All schools will be free to manage their day-to-day 
budgets, with local education authorities given a new strategic role. Opted-out 
schools will be freed from central government control and brought together with 
City Technology Colleges into the mainstream of the local school system.
New rights for parents
We will reform the Conservatives' scheme for the local management of schools All 
schools will be free to manage their day-to-day budgets, with local education 
authorities given a new strategic role. Opted-out schools will be freed from 
central government control and brought together with City Technology Colleges 
into the mainstream of the local school system.
Home-school contracts will tell parents exactly what the school undertakes to 
deliver and what their responsibilities are. If they are dissatisfied with the 
school or education authority, they will be able to call in the Education 
Standards Commission and get action taken.
We wish to see the key role of church and other voluntary-aided schools secured 
and available equally and on the same criteria to all religions. 
We will modernise the curriculum 
Labour will modernise the national curriculum and apply it in all schools. From 
the age of 14, pupils will study five essential subjects. English, mathematics, 
science, a modern language and technology. In schools teaching in Welsh, the 
study of Welsh will be included. Every pupil will also be offered a wide range 
of academic, technical and other options.
Taking account of the views of parents, enployers, teachers, pupils and the 
commendations of the Higginson Report, we will establish a five-subject A level 
and bring it together with technical qualifications into our new Advanced 
Certificate. Open to art-time and full-time students of any age, it will include 
'credits' which can be transferred between different institutions. We will 
consult widely about the detailed structure of this new qualification, and 
finalise proposals quickly.
Young people must have real opportunities to widen their experience and skills. 
Sixteen year olds not in full-time education will be entitled to a new 
traineeship lasting for up to two years, with an option of a further two years. 
Every young person in employment will be guaranteed the right to Learn While You 
Earn. 
Labour's education targets 
We have set ourselves four education targets. They are the basis for our 
strategy and the benchmark against which progress will be judged.
First, a nursery education for all three and four year olds whose parents wish 
by the year 2000.
Second, within five years, we want four out of five 16 to 18 year olds to be 
able to achieve at least five GCSEs at grades A, B or C, or their equivalent.
Third, by the end of the decade, we want half of Britain's 16 to 19 year olds to 
be able to qualify at the new Advanced Certificate levels or the equivalent in 
BTEC and other post-16 opportunities for study.
Fourth, within 20 years, we will double the number of students in higher 
education, with at least one in three young adults participating by the year 
2000.
The student loan scheme deters many bright youngsters from poor families. We 
will replace it with a fairer system of student grants and targeted help for 
housing and vacation hardship. We will take effective steps to safeguard 
standards throughout higher education. 
We will stop the Conservatives' adult education cuts and encourage local 
authorities to develop adult and community education and access courses, 
particularly for mature students. People over 50 who missed earlier 
opportunities will be able to apply for a 'Return to Learn' grant towards 
further or higher education. 
The best future for families and communities
Britain's families deserve the support which families receive in other European 
countries. We will create a new sense of community and social cohesion. 
We will make families better off 
As we explained earlier (see page 12), we will increase child benefit for seven 
million families. Higher pensions and related benefits will benefit another 12 
million people. We will reform the tax and national insurance system, and take 
740,000 low-paid people out of tax. After the first year's extra increases we 
will restore the link between increases in the basic pension and prices or 
earnings, whichever is higher.
Britain's national insurance system is far more efficient than private 
insurance. We will open it up to new groups such as low-paid and part-time 
workers.
Labour will end the Conservatives' freeze on benefits for widowed mothers and 
other lone parents. We will encourage parents on income support to claim 
maintenance by allowing them to keep part of it before benefit is cut.
We will restore nutritional guidelines for
school meals and reverse the cuts in free school meals as soon as possible.
We will reform benefits for people with disabilities and make it easier for 
those available for work to take employment. As resources allow, we will improve 
and extend invalid care allowance. 
Labour will develop a flexible decade of retirement between the ages of 60 and 
70, 50 that men and women can choose to retire on a full pension or continue in 
work without discrimination. 
Our new National Pensions Plan, building on the State Earnings Related Pension 
Scheme, will offer people now in work a pension based on their 20 best years' 
earnings. Those who are self-employed will also be able to join. Occupational 
and personal pension schemes will have to guarantee a minimum pension before 
they can contract out, and guarantee equal treatment for men and women.
We will reform means-tested benefits, replace the Social Fund, and restore 
benefit rights to 16 and 17 year olds as soon as possible. To relieve anxiety 
about funeral costs, we will introduce a funeral payment of £600, available on 
request. The costs will in most cases be recovered from the deceased's estate, 
although small estates will be disregarded.
We will abolish the poll tax 
Labour will abolish the poll tax immediately. We will replace it with our Fair 
Rates system, related to people's ability to pay. We reject the Conservatives' 
unfair banding and discount system, which would create a property poll tax. We 
will modernise the valuation system to ensure that properties are fairly 
assessed. 
Abolition of the minimum 20 per cent contribution - which will be of particular 
help to young people - will be followed by an improved rebate system, with 
special help to retired people on low incomes living alone.
Business rates will become a local tax again, with rate rebates for small firms.
People need decent homes 
Labour will establish mortgage rescue schemes throughout the country, enabling
home buyers to remain as tenants or part-owners. Mortgage interest tax relief 
will continue at the present rate. We will seek new arrangements to enable 
first-time buyers to concentrate relief in the early years. Housing log books 
and an end to gazumping will also help home buyers. We will also ensure that 
home-buyers receive proper advice about the potential cost of their mortgages in 
future years.
Councils and housing associations will be allowed to lease or buy empty homes in 
order to provide accommodation for homeless people. Homes left empty without 
good r reason by any public authority will be e transferred to a better social 
landlord.
We will restore housing benefit to people under 18 and provide more refuges for 
women escaping domestic violence.
Labour will keep the right to buy. We will increase the number of homes for rent 
by establishing a Housing Bank to facilitate the balanced use of councils' 
capital receipts and offer investment capital at attractive rates of interest. 
Tenants will be offered the option to 'part rent, part buy'. Steps will be taken 
to improve sub-standard housing.
Council tenants will be guaranteed real rights over their homes. Councils will 
set rents at a reasonable level, reflecting income levels in the different 
regions and localities. We will eliminate racial discrimination in housing 
allocation and improve safety on estates.
In the private sector there is a need both for homes at market rents and those 
where rents are regulated and housing benefit payable. We will consult fully 
before introducing reforms and will not legislate retrospectively.
All tenants must be protected against noise, nuisance; harassment and shoddy 
service. 
Leaseholders will have new rights, either to extend their lease, or collectively 
buy the freehold of their property from non-resident freeholders. 
We will protect people against crime 
Crime in Britain has more than doubled since 1979. Over five million crimes were 
recorded last year, but the real total is certainly higher.
Labour will insist that local councils work with the police to improve crime 
prevention by 
  modernising vulnerable estates; 
  improving street lighting; 
  demolishing derelict buildings; 
  fencing off waste-land. 
Planning applications will be examined against crime prevention criteria. The 
sale of replica guns will be banned.
Elected police authorities will use the extra resources available for the war 
against crime to ensure that more police officers are visible on the beat, 
backed up by the modern technology which is essential to crime prevention and 
detection. 
We will implement the recommendations of he Woolf Report to improve prison 
conditions. Prison must offer training for employment, not for crime. We will 
promote ion-custodial sentences for non-violent rimes and take steps to 
eradicate the discrimination in sentencing policy which particularly affects 
women and ethnic minority offenders 
People have a right to first-class services 
We will develop customer contracts for local services, along the lines pioneered 
by Labour authorities. Local communities will help design services to meet their 
needs, with voluntary groups playing a key role in delivering services.
Our new Quality Commission, incorporating the work of the Audit Commission, will 
ensure councils provide high-quality, value-for-money services, with clear 
avenues for complaint and redress. We will not tolerate shoddy service, 
inefficiency or waste. Councils will have to carry out an annual survey of 
customer satisfaction, published just before local elections.
The contracts of chief officers will be linked to quality targets, with senior 
managers quired to sample the service they provide. Compulsory competitive 
tendering will be abolished, but the Quality Commission will have the power, 
where services have broken own, to insist that they are put out to tender, with 
contractors required to meet conditions such as quality thresholds and fair 
employment. 
Local planning must reflect what people, not developers, want. The 
Conservatives' bonfire of planning controls has led to ill-thought out 
development, often against the wishes of local people. Labour will give people 
more say in drawing up plans for their area and create a new right of appeal for 
residents against developments which fly in the face of their local plan. 
Beneficial development will be speeded up, damaging development checked and the 
green belt safeguarded. We will reverse the present planning presumption in 
favour of opencast coal mining and give top priority to local people and their 
environment. 
Councils must be accountable to local people 
We shall introduce annual elections in England and Wales, with one third of 
councillors elected each year. Councillors must get proper support, to ensure 
that they are drawn from all parts of the community and are not financially 
disadvantaged.
Labour will sign the European Charter of Local Self Government and give local 
councils a general power of competence, in line with other European countries, 
so that councils can develop new and imaginative services.
We will reform the system for allocating grants to local councils and introduce 
less centralised rules on capital spending, enabling councils to make prudent 
long-term investment. 
We will support arts and leisure 
Building on the example of many Labour councils which have developed imaginative 
arts initiatives, we will make the arts a statutory responsibility for local 
authorities. Labour's Ministry for the Arts and Media will encourage Britain's 
arts and their associated industries, including broadcasting and the press, to 
develop new ideas and attract more
people. Government will commission the best designers, artists and architects, 
for instance, to help communities transform run-down city centres.
We will renew the BBC's Charter in a way a which guarantees continuation of 
high-quality public service broadcasting - available in all parts of the country 
and covering a wide spectrum of programmes. The licence fee remains the best way 
of financing the BBC and preserving its independence. A concessionary fee will 
be introduced for all pensioners.
As people have more leisure, they also need better facilities for sport. We will 
encourage councils to invest in modern, well-staffed sports centres for the 
enjoyment of people of all ages and abilities, and give mandatory rate relief to 
voluntary sports clubs.
New facilities and better backing for people with outstanding talent will help 
put Britain back on the international sporting map. We will review sports 
taxation, reform the Sports Councils and make football grounds safe for 
spectators. We will stop the wanton sale of school playing fields and ensure 
that sport takes its proper place within the curriculum. 
We will protect consumers 
Our Consumers' Charter will cover all goods and services. It will include: 
  tougher health and safety standards; 
  compensation for injury from dangerous products; 
  comprehensive guarantees; 
  a fast, simple remedy if things go wrong. 
We will press for similar standards throughout the European Community and 
strengthen the work of consumer groups and advice centres so that aspirations 
and standards are met.
Every utility will be required to provide a customer contract, with compensation 
if standards are not met. Gas and electncity disconnections will be banned 
completely where young children or elderly people are concerned. We will 
regulate telephone services which demean women and corrupt children.
We will strengthen the regulation of the utilities, enforce standards through 
our Consumer Protection Commission, and ensure prices are cut or other action 
taken where profits are excessive so that the customer gets a fair deal. We will 
establish a Petroleum Products Regulator. Government and Parliament will have a 
stronger role to work on the consumer's behalf. We will help consumers have a 
voice locally and nationally. 
We will create a cleaner, safer environment 
The greatest challenge we face is the responsibility to ensure the survival of 
the planet.
Economic progress goes hand in hand with environmental responsibility. Labour 
will embrace the goal of sustainable development, with environmental 
modernisation an integral part of our industrial strategy.
Labour's Prime Minister will go to the Earth Summit in June, with a commitment 
to stabilising emissions of CO2 (the main source of global warming) at their 
1990 levels by the end of the decade and a recognition that significant cuts 
will be needed in the early years of the new century. We will adopt the tightest 
possible timetable for eliminating CFCs and other chemicals which deplete the 
ozone layer.
Our tough pollution standards, based on the health and safety of children, will 
be enforced by an independent Environmental Protection Executive. We will 
develop a national waste strategy promoting waste minimisation, re-use and 
recycling. Business will be encouraged to have environmental audits. The trade 
in toxic waste will be banned.
We will establish a new legal right to a clean environment, ensure environmental 
freedom of information, implement European environmental standards such as 
Environmental Impact Assessment and promote a European Environmental Charter. 
Every government policy will be subjected to environmental appraisal, 
co-ordinated by a Cabinet Minister for Environmental Protection. An annual Green 
Book assessing the environmental impact of government economic policy will 
accompany the traditional financial Red Book. 
Improving inner cities 
We will reverse the unfair treatment which has meant that the inner cities have 
lost out in terms of local government finance, housing investment and support 
for employment. Labour will pull together the present unco-ordinated initiatives 
into a coherent urban programme which will strengthen local economies, generate 
jobs and improve the quality of people's lives.
We will encourage local councils to create enterprise partnerships with 
employers, trade unions and the community, which will mobilise the commitment 
and the enthusiasm of local people. The composition and terms of reference of 
urban development corporations will be changed immediately and they will in due 
course be wound up in an orderly way.
At the local level, we will tackle litter and graffiti and start to transform 
inner city environments by establishing neighbourhood action areas where local 
communities can develop their own plans for regenerating the area. 
Clean water, healthy food 
We will ensure that our drinking water, beaches and rivers meet the highest 
European standards and end the dumping of industrial waste at sea. The provision 
of water is so fundamental that it is a priority for return to public control. 
In the meantime, we will protect consumers against high prices and poor service 
and give greater priority to environmental problems.
Labour's independent Food Standards Agency will ensure high food quality 
standards. Our Department of Food and Farming will offer British farmers and 
consumers a better deal. Subsidies for production will gradually be replaced 
with green premium payments to promote environmentally sound management of the 
countryside. 
We will invest in decent public transport 
We will transform transport policy by ensuring, for the first time, that all 
road railway, aviation, shipping and inland waterways projects are judged on the 
basis of their environmental, social and economic impact. Within six months we 
will review the roads programme and mobilise private capital for large-scale 
public transport investment.
All major transport projects will be subject to Environment Impact Assessment 
and we will fullly observe the requirements of the European Directive on EIAs. 
Road building proposals for sensitive areas such as Oxleas Wood and Twyford Down 
must be subject to full environmental assessment. 
We reject Conservative plans to privatise British Rail. Instead, we will 
modernise, setting clear performance targets to improve the quality of service 
and shift more freight from road to rail. 
We will tackle the problem of congestion and environmental damage by enabling 
local authorities to provide better quality transport. We will end the 
deregulation of buses, introduce bus priority measures integrated with new rapid 
transit systems within a 'green light' programme designed to encourage people to 
transfer to public transport. Proper concessionary fare schemes will be 
developed in every area. Traffic management schemes to cut unnecessary car use 
and better facilities for cyclists and pedestrians will make town centres safer 
and more attractive.
We will reform transport taxation in order to encourage smaller, cleaner cars 
and the use of catalytic converters. The subsidy to company cars will be phased 
out.
In London and the south-east, congestion costs the economy over £10 billion a 
year. We will stop bus deregulation and privatisation of London Transport and 
promote efficient public transport.
We will seek to reverse the unacceptable decline in Britain's merchant navy and 
encourage the greater use of British-owned and crewed vessels, adding to 
Britain's security and reducing the cost to our balance of payments.
All transport services will be required to meet high standards of service and 
safety, with effective avenues for complaint and compensation where appropriate. 
We will establish a new independent transport safety inspectorate within the 
health and safety legislation to improve the safety environment which has led to 
the terrible tragedies of recent years. Increased security measures and better 
staffing will be particularly welcome to women, elderly and disabled people. 
Saving energy 
Labour will give top priority to energy saving rather than energy sales. We will 
set up an Energy Efficiency Agency and a Renewable Energy Agency. We will 
require the gas and electricity companies to invest in insulation and other 
energy-saving measures.
We will not invest in new nuclear power stations, continue with those in the 
planning process or extend the lives of existing nuclear stations beyond their 
safe life span. Britain's dependence on nuclear power will therefore steadily 
diminish. We will use the most modern technology to deal with the problems of 
decommissioning and nuclear waste. 
A beffer life in the country 
We will expand affordable housing in rural areas, develop countryside colleges 
to meet wider training needs and invest in workshops and small business units. 
We will support rural schools and improve public transport. The work of the 
Rural Development Commission and the Development Board for Rural Wales will be 
boosted.
The ecological richness of our countryside must be protected. We will give 
people a new right of access to open country, create new national parks and step 
up protection for special sites. We will consult widely on the best way forward 
for nature conservation and countryside bodies, including independent boards for 
all national parks. We will safeguard Britain's rivers and canals and improve 
leisure facilities. Anglers will benefit from and contribute to our plans for 
improved river quality. 
We will protect animals 
We will reduce cruelty to animals within Britain and Europe. We will ban the 
testing of beauty aids on animals, outlaw fur farming and ensure better 
treatment of farm animals and animals in transit. Our national dog registration 
scheme will provide the money for a warden service.
As part of our programme to outlaw cruelty wild mammals, we will allow a free 
vote in the House of Commons on a proposal to ban the hunting of live quarry 
with hounds and, if it is passed, provide parliamentary time for the necessary 
legislation. There will be no new limitations on the country sports of angling 
or shooting. 
A modern democracy
It is time to modernise Britain's democracy. Central to Labour's purpose in 
government is our commitment to radical constitutional reform. 
Our Charter of Rights, backed up by a complementary and democratically enforced 
bill of rights, will establish in law the specific rights of every citizen.
We will start in our first parliamentary session with a Freedom of Information 
Act which will open up government to the people. Exceptions will be tightly 
drawn. 
We will give power to the nations and regions 
We will move immediately to establish an elected Scottish Parliament. It will 
have powers to legislate for and administer Scotland's domestic affairs and 
modernise Scotland's economy and the ability to represent Scotland within the 
United Kingdom and Europe.
Labour's legislation will be firmly based on the proposals agreed in the 
Scottish Constitutional Convention. The Parliament will be elected on an 
Additional Member System. It will be responsible for local government, health, 
housing, education, transport, environmental and other policies within Scotland.
In our first year, we will introduce a new Welsh Language Act. We will 
establish, in the lifetime of a full Parliament, an elected Welsh Assembly in 
Cardiff with powers and functions which reflect the existing administrative 
structure. Local government in Wales will be reformed to create between 25 and 
30 'most purpose' authorities. 
A regional tier of government in the English regions will take over many powers 
now exercised nationally, such as regional economic planning and transport. 
These new administrations will later form the basis for elected regional 
governments. To simplify local government in England, we will establish 'most 
purpose' authorities generally 
based on district councils. In some areas, a county-wide authority or the 
amalgamation of districts may be more appropriate. We will consult widely before 
finalising proposals. 
London is now the only European capital without the advantage of its own elected 
authority. Labour will give Londoners the right to elect a new Greater London 
Authority responsible for making London a better place to live and work. 
We will safeguard press freedom 
We will remove unjustified restrictions on broadcasting and establish an urgent 
enquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission into the concentration of media 
ownership. If the press fail to deal with abuses of individual privacy, we will 
implement the Calcutt Report's recommendations for statutory protection. 
Individuals must be able to control personal information about themselves. We 
will strengthen Britain's Data Protection Act in line with European practice. 
The security services will be brought under the scrutiny of a Parliamentary 
Select Committee. 
We will see that justice is done 
There is widespread concern about the miscarriages of justice which have 
imprisoned innocent people. As part of our sweeping programme of law reform, we 
will establish an additional appeals tribunal, including lay members as well as 
lawyers, to examine the most contentious convictions. The Police and Criminal 
Evidence Act will be reformed.
Convictions will no longer be possible on uncorroborated confession evidence.
We will improve access to legal aid and, when resources allow, extend it to 
tribunal hearings. We will encourage the expansion of voluntary advice centres 
and invest in better support for victims. We will appoint from the House of 
Commons a Minister for Legal Administration, who will initially be part of the 
Lord Chancellor's Department. We will go on to create a Department of Legal 
Administration headed by a Minister in the Commons who will be responsible for 
all courts and tribunals in England and Wales. Future reform of the distinctive 
Scottish legal system will be the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament.
We will work with the legal profession to open up new opportunities to women and 
to black and ethnic minority groups, and create an independent judicial 
appointments commission. A Sentencing Council will bring some consistency into 
what is now often a haphazard process. A Court Inspectorate will improve the 
efficiency of our often outdated judicial system. 
We will offer everyone a the fair chance 
Stronger sex and race discrimination laws will ensure that organisations awarded 
government contracts take positive steps to promote equal treatment. We will 
introduce a new law dealing with discrimination on grounds of sexuality, repeal 
the unjust Clause 28 and allow a free vote in the House of Commons on the age of 
consent.
In order to safeguard the rights of people with disabilities, we will appoint a 
Minister for the Disabled and extend anti-discrimination laws to cover this 
group.
We will establish a Children's Minister within the Home Office to co-ordinate 
policies for children across departments. One independent Children's 
Commissioner will promote the interests of all children. Protecting children 
will be high on the agenda, as will the full implementation of the Children Act 
and the UN Convention to promote childrens rights. 
Labour's Ministry for Women 
Following the successful example of France, Germany and many other countries, 
Labour will appoint a Cabinet Minister for Women. She will ensure that women's 
voices are heard at the highest level. She will monitor the work of all other 
departments and co-ordinate action for equal opportunities across government.
The Ministry will also initiate legislation for women. In particular, we will 
introduce a new Sex Equality Act which will combine and strengthen the current 
equal pay and sex discrimination laws. 
The Ministry for Women will have special responsibility for co-ordinating 
childcare policy, improving women's safety and encouraging more women to 
participate in public life. 
The black and ethnic minority communities 
We are determined to ensure that women and men from ethnic minority groups are 
full and equal members of the community.
As well as strengthening the race discrimination laws and extending the powers 
of the Commission for Racial Equality, we will press for similar laws throughout 
the European Community. We will not tolerate the present level of racial 
harassment and attacks, and will ensure that more effective protection is given 
to vulnerable groups. Contract compliance laws will be the first step towards 
guaranteeing the black and Asian British their fair share of jobs. 
Fair citizenship law 
We will introduce fair immigration and citizenship laws which restore the right 
to British citizenship for every child born in Britain. Our laws, which will not 
discriminate on grounds of sex or race, will respect the right to family life. A 
new Act will guarantee sanctuary to genuine refugees but prevent bogus 
applications for asylum. 
We are determined to see that equally fair laws apply throughout the European 
Community and will oppose any attempt to remove voting rights from Commonwealth 
citizens in European elections. 
Northern Ireland 
Labour will continue the present talks on Northern Ireland. In the long term, we 
want to see a united Ireland achieved by consensus and without violence. We 
support the commitment in the Anglo-Irish Agreement that 'any change in the 
status of Northern reland would only come about with the consent of a majority 
in Northern Ireland'. We will work within the agreement to achieve our policy of 
unity by consent, and strengthen measures against injustice, discrimination and 
deprivation.
We will fight terrorism by every lawful means, repealing the counter-productive 
Prevention of Terrorism Act and replacing it with measure which is more 
effective and genuinely acceptable in a democratic society. 
A modern Parliament 
Westminster must become more effective in protecting citizens and holding 
government to account. We will therefore improve the procedures and facilities 
of the House of Commons, strengthen scrutiny of EC legislation, and end 
ministerial misuse of the Royal Prerogative.
We will give shareholders the right to vote upon all political donations made by 
public companies, require donations to political parties to be declared in a 
public register, require the accounts of political parties to be published and, 
as recommended by the Houghton Report, introduce state aid for political 
parties.
Further constitutional reforms will include those leading to the replacement of 
the House of Lords with a new elected Second Chamber which will have the power 
to delay, for the lifetime of a Parliament, change to designated legislation 
reducing individual or constitutional rights.
We will continue to encourage a wide and well-informed public debate on the 
electoral system. The working party on electoral systems which we established in 
opposition under the distinguished chairmanship of Professor Raymond Plant will 
continue its work with an extended membership and enhanced authority and report 
to the next Labour government.
This general election was called only after months of on-again, off-again 
dithering which damaged our economy and weakened our democracy. No government 
with a majority should be allowed to put the interests of party above country as 
the Conservatives have done. Although an early election will sometimes be 
necessary, we will introduce as a general rule a fixed parliamentary term. 
Britain in a new world
We need a new government to grasp new opportunities. A Labour government ready 
to exploit Britain's unique, interlinking membership of the United Nations 
Security Council, NATO, the Commonwealth, the European Community and the G7. 
It's a new chance to enhance peace in the world 
Labour, which in opposition joined our NATO allies in rejecting the Conservative 
government's cold war nostalgia, will in government partner the United States in 
negotiating to reduce the world's stocks of nuclear weapons. We shall seek to 
involve the four former Soviet nuclear republics, together with France and 
China. Until elimination of those stocks is achieved, Labour will retain 
Britain's nuclear capability, with the number of warheads no greater than the 
present total.
With the increase in major nuclear powers from five to eight, proliferation is a 
dangerous reality and may become an even greater threat to peace and stability. 
The Tory government contributed to proliferation when it permitted the supply of 
nuclear weapons material to Saddam Hussein. The Labour government will work in 
the United Nations for a strengthened nuclear non-proliferation treaty, backed 
by meaningful sanctions and by a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. We will 
in addition work for a global ban on chemical and biological weapons and 
stronger controls to prevent proliferation of ballistic missiles. Meanwhile, we 
will join Russia in ending nuclear tests.
We will actively support the peace-making role of the UN - for example, in 
Cambodia and Somalia - and work for a permanent United Nations peace-keeping 
force. 
It's a new chance to solve long-running disputes 
The Labour government will work in the United Nations and the European Community 
to enhance peace prospects in the Middle East. Our aims are security for Israel 
and self-determination for the Palestinians. There must be strict control on 
arms sales to the region.
Labour will work in the United Nations, the Commonwealth, the European Community 
and NATO to help bring about the peaceful reunification of Cyprus, on the 
federal basis advocated by the sovereign government of Cyprus. The Labour 
government will make itself available to our friends in India and Pakistan to 
assist in achieving a negotiated solution to the problem of Kashmir that is 
acceptable to all the people of Kashmir - Moslems, Hindus and Buddhists.
We will, as a matter of urgency, discuss with Hong Kong's representatives what 
measures may best enhance democracy and confidence during Britain's five 
remaining years of responsibility for the colony. 
It's a new chance to provide genuine security for Britain 
As the party which took Britain into NATO, Labour will base its defence policies 
on UK membership of the alliance. We will provide whatever resources are needed 
for effective defence for our country, providing the necessary level of forces 
with the appropriate equipment and weapons.
Unlike the Tories, we recognise that disarmament negotiations and technological 
change can bring about problems for our defence industries. Nearly 100,000 lobs 
have already been lost during the past two years and 123,000 more are in danger.
Selling more arms to poor countries is not an acceptable or effective way of 
maintaining Britain's defence industries. We will stop sales to countries which 
might use them for internal repression or international aggression.
The Labour government will set up a Defence Diversification Agency to assist 
workers, communities and companies affected by change. The agency will ensure 
that resources made available by reductions in defence spending - reductions 
already planned by the Conservative government - are used in the first instance 
for rebuilding and 
investing in our manufacturing base. From the fruits of this investment can stem 
finance for health and the social services. 
It's a new chance for a new Europe 
The Labour government will promote Britain out of the European second division 
into which our country has been relegated by the Tories. Our first chance will 
be the United Kingdom's six-months' presidency of the Community, starting on 1 
July. We shall use that presidency to end the Tories' opt-out from the Social 
Chapter, so that the British
people can benefit from European safeguards. We will also use our presidency to 
help ensure that poorer countries are not disadvantaged as a result of the 
Single Market.
We shall play an active part in negotiations on Economic and Monetary Union. We 
shall fight for Britain's interests, working for Europe-wide policies to fight 
unemployment and to enhance regional and structural industrial policy. The 
elected finance ministers of the different countries must become the effective 
political counterpart to the central bank whose headquarters should be in 
Britain.
As part of the evolving role of the regions of Europe, we will establish a 
Scottish representative office in Brussels and seek appropriate representation 
for the Scottish Parliament in European institutions. We shall seek fundamental 
changes in the wasteful Common Agricultural Policy. Savings can help finance 
other Community projects.
We shall make the widening of the Community a priority, and shall advocate 
speedy admission for Austria, Sweden,
Finland and Cyprus, whose membership applications have been or are about to be 
lodged. We shall seek to create conditions in which, at the appropriate time, 
the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe can join the Community. 
It's a new chance for human rights 
Labour will set up a Human Rights Division in the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office, and require all Britain's diplomatic posts abroad to appoint an officer 
to monitor human rights. There will be an annual report to Parliament. Decisions 
on economic aid and arms sales will be linked to human rights records. 
It's a new chance to win friends abroad 
Labour will end Tory government meddling in the valuable work of the British 
Council. Within carefully controlled costings, Labour will consider new scope 
for the BBC World Service, praised by listeners such as Terry Waite and Mikhail 
Gorbachev, and for the BBC's World Service Television Service. 
It's a new chance to fight world hunger and poverty 
Under the Tories, Britain's aid budget has been cut to its lowest ever. The 
Labour government will aim to meet the United Nations aid target of 0.7 per cent 
of GNP within five years - the lifetime of a full Parliament. Labour will 
establish a separate Department of State for International development, whose 
Minister will be in the Cabinet.
Tackling poverty will be the top priority of our aid programme. We will make aid 
more effective, work more closely with non-governmental agencies, put women at 
the heart of our programme and, in co-ordination with other donors, reduce the 
share of tied aid. Labour will promote environmentally sustainable development 
and encourage new approaches to reduce Third World debt. We will restore funding 
for development education in the UK.
We will promote greater and fairer trade for poor countries, to enable their 
economies to grow and diversify. UN and European Community action to help the 
world's poor must become more effective. Labour will take Britain back into 
UNESCO.
The Labour government will work within the G7 and the European Community to win 
support for a New Marshall Plan to assist the former communist countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe and of the ex-Soviet Union. Instability in those 
countries, caused by shortages and discontent, could be as great a threat to 
world peace as the armed communism that has now disappeared. 
It's a new chance for Britain in the Commonwealth 
The Tories have regarded the Commonwealth as a wearisome obligation. Labour 
believes that this unique inter-racial and inter-hemispheric organization can 
play a central role in fighting racism, hunger and human rights violations. We 
shall play an active part in the Commonwealth and join the South Africa 
Committee of Foreign Ministers which the Tories have boycotted. 
It's a new chance to safeguard the environment 
The Tories have been laggardly and reluctant in international moves to protect 
our planet's environment. Labour will set the pace in pressing for international 
action to safeguard the ozone layer, to combat acid rain, to tackle the problem 
of global warming, to face up to the environmental needs of the poorest people 
of the world. We will scrap the Tory government's opt-out on European Community 
environmental protection measures and deadlines. Labour will adamantly oppose 
any attempts to permit commercial exploitation of the virgin continent of 
Antarctica. 

Labour Party Manifesto, General Election 1997new Labour because Britain deserves 
better
Britain will be better with new Labour
  'Our case is simple: that Britain can and must be better'
  'The vision is one of national renewal, a country with drive, purpose and 
  energy'
  'In each area of policy a new and distinctive approach has been mapped out, 
  one that differs from the old left and the Conservative right. This is why new 
  Labour is new'
  'New Labour is a party of ideas and ideals but not of outdated ideology. What 
  counts is what works. The objectives are radical. The means will be modern'
  ' This is our contract with the people'
I believe in Britain. It is a great country with a great history. The British 
people are a great people. But I believe Britain can and must be better: better 
schools, better hospitals, better ways of tackling crime, of building a modern 
welfare state, of equipping ourselves for a new world economy.
I want a Britain that is one nation, with shared values and purpose, where merit 
comes before privilege, run for the many not the few, strong and sure of itself 
at home and abroad.
I want a Britain that does not shuffle into the new millennium afraid of the 
future, but strides into it with confidence.
I want to renew our country's faith in the ability of its government and 
politics to deliver this new Britain. I want to do it by making a limited set of 
important promises and achieving them. This is the purpose of the bond of trust 
I set out at the end of this introduction, in which ten specific commitments are 
put before you. Hold us to them. They are our covenant with you.
I want to renew faith in politics by being honest about the last 18 years. Some 
things the Conservatives got right. We will not change them. It is where they 
got things wrong that we will make change. We have no intention or desire to 
replace one set of dogmas by another.
I want to renew faith in politics through a government that will govern in the 
interest of the many, the broad majority of people who work hard, play by the 
rules, pay their dues and feel let down by a political system that gives the 
breaks to the few, to an elite at the top increasingly out of touch with the 
rest of us.
And I want, above all, to govern in a way that brings our country together, that 
unites our nation in facing the tough and dangerous challenges of the new 
economy and changed society in which we must live. I want a Britain which we all 
feel part of, in whose future we all have a stake, in which what I want for my 
own children I want for yours. 
A new politics
The reason for having created new Labour is to meet the challenges of a 
different world. The millennium symbolises a new era opening up for Britain. I 
am confident about our future prosperity, even optimistic, if we have the 
courage to change and use it to build a better Britain.
To accomplish this means more than just a change of government. Our aim is no 
less than to set British political life on a new course for the future.
People are cynical about politics and distrustful of political promises. That is 
hardly surprising. There have been few more gross breaches of faith than when 
the Conservatives under Mr Major promised, before the election of 1992, that 
they would not raise taxes, but would cut them every year; and then went on to 
raise them by the largest amount in peacetime history starting in the first 
Budget after the election. The Exchange Rate Mechanism as the cornerstone of 
economic policy, Europe, health, crime, schools, sleaze - the broken promises 
are strewn across the country's memory.
The Conservatives' broken promises taint all politics. That is why we have made 
it our guiding rule not to promise what we cannot deliver; and to deliver what 
we promise. What follows is not the politics of a 100 days that dazzles for a 
time, then fizzles out. It is not the politics of a revolution, but of a fresh 
start, the patient rebuilding and renewing of this country - renewal that can 
take root and build over time.
That is one way in which politics in Britain will gain a new lease of life. But 
there is another. We aim to put behind us the bitter political struggles of left 
and right that have torn our country apart for too many decades. Many of these 
conflicts have no relevance whatsoever to the modern world - public versus 
private, bosses versus workers, middle class versus working class. It is time 
for this country to move on and move forward. We are proud of our history, proud 
of what we have achieved - but we must learn from our history, not be chained to 
it. 
New Labour
The purpose of new Labour is to give Britain a different political choice: the 
choice between a failed Conservative government, exhausted and divided in 
everything other than its desire to cling on to power, and a new and revitalised 
Labour Party that has been resolute in transforming itself into a party of the 
future. We have rewritten our constitution, the new Clause IV, to put a 
commitment to enterprise alongside the commitment to justice. We have changed 
the way we make policy, and put our relations with the trade unions on a modern 
footing where they accept they can get fairness but no favours from a Labour 
government. Our MPs are all now selected by ordinary party members, not small 
committees or pressure groups. The membership itself has doubled, to over 
400,000, with half the members having joined since the last election.
We submitted our draft manifesto, new Labour new life for Britain, to a ballot 
of all our members, 95 per cent of whom gave it their express endorsement.
We are a national party, supported today by people from all walks of life, from 
the successful businessman or woman to the pensioner on a council estate. Young 
people have flooded in to join us in what is the fastest growing youth section 
of any political party in the western world. 
The vision
We are a broad-based movement for progress and justice. New Labour is the 
political arm of none other than the British people as a whole. Our values are 
the same: the equal worth of all, with no one cast aside; fairness and justice 
within strong communities.
But we have liberated these values from outdated dogma or doctrine, and we have 
applied these values to the modern world.
I want a country in which people get on, do well, make a success of their lives. 
I have no time for the politics of envy. We need more successful entrepreneurs, 
not fewer of them. But these life-chances should be for all the people. And I 
want a society in which ambition and compassion are seen as partners not 
opposites - where we value public service as well as material wealth.
New Labour believes in a society where we do not simply pursue our own 
individual aims but where we hold many aims in common and work together to 
achieve them. How we build the industry and employment opportunities of the 
future; how we tackle the division and inequality in our society; how we care 
for and enhance our environment and quality of life; how we develop modern 
education and health services; how we create communities that are safe, where 
mutual respect and tolerance are the order of the day. These are things we must 
achieve together as a country.
The vision is one of national renewal, a country with drive, purpose and energy. 
A Britain equipped to prosper in a global economy of technological change; with 
a modern welfare state; its politics more accountable; and confident of its 
place in the world. 
Programme: a new centre and centre-left politics
In each area of policy a new and distinctive approach has been mapped out, one 
that differs both from the solutions of the old left and those of the 
Conservative right. This is why new Labour is new. We believe in the strength of 
our values, but we recognise also that the policies of 1997 cannot be those of 
1947 or 1967. More detailed policy has been produced by us than by any 
opposition in history. Our direction and destination are clear.
The old left would have sought state control of industry. The Conservative right 
is content to leave all to the market. We reject both approaches. Government and 
industry must work together to achieve key objectives aimed at enhancing the 
dynamism of the market, not undermining it.
In industrial relations, we make it clear that there will be no return to flying 
pickets, secondary action, strikes with no ballots or the trade union law of the 
1970s. There will instead be basic minimum rights for the individual at the 
workplace, where our aim is partnership not conflict between employers and 
employees.
In economic management, we accept the global economy as a reality and reject the 
isolationism and 'go-it-alone' policies of the extremes of right or left.
In education, we reject both the idea of a return to the 11-plus and the 
monolithic comprehensive schools that take no account of children's differing 
abilities. Instead we favour all-in schooling which identifies the distinct 
abilities of individual pupils and organises them in classes to maximise their 
progress in individual subjects. In this way we modernise the comprehensive 
principle, learning from the experience of its 30 years of application.
In health policy, we will safeguard the basic principles of the NHS, which we 
founded, but will not return to the top-down management of the 1970s. So we will 
keep the planning and provision of healthcare separate, but put planning on a 
longer-term, decentralised and more co-operative basis. The key is to root out 
unnecessary administrative cost, and to spend money on the right things - 
frontline care.
On crime, we believe in personal responsibility and in punishing crime, but also 
tackling its underlying causes - so, tough on crime, tough on the causes of 
crime, different from the Labour approach of the past and the Tory policy of 
today.
Over-centralisation of government and lack of accountability was a problem in 
governments of both left and right. Labour is committed to the democratic 
renewal of our country through decentralisation and the elimination of excessive 
government secrecy.
In addition, we will face up to the new issues that confront us. We will be the 
party of welfare reform. In consultation and partnership with the people, we 
will design a modern welfare state based on rights and duties going together, 
fit for the modern world.
We will stand up for Britain's interests in Europe after the shambles of the 
last six years, but, more than that, we will lead a campaign for reform in 
Europe. Europe isn't working in the way this country and Europe need. But to 
lead means to be involved, to be constructive, to be capable of getting our own 
way.
We will put concern for the environment at the heart of policy-making, so that 
it is not an add-on extra, but informs the whole of government, from housing and 
energy policy through to global warming and international agreements.
We will search out at every turn new ways and new ideas to tackle the new 
issues: how to encourage more flexible working hours and practices to suit 
employees and employers alike; how to harness the huge potential of the new 
information technology; how to simplify the processes of the government machine; 
how to put public and private sector together in partnership to give us the 
infrastructure and transport system we need.
We will be a radical government. But the definition of radicalism will not be 
that of doctrine, whether of left or right, but of achievement. New Labour is a 
party of ideas and ideals but not of outdated ideology. What counts is what 
works. The objectives are radical. The means will be modern.
So the party is transformed. The vision is clear. And from that vision stems a 
modern programme of change and renewal for Britain. We understand that after 18 
years of one-party rule, people want change, believe that it is necessary for 
the country and for democracy, but require faith to make the change.
We therefore set out in the manifesto that follows ten commitments, commitments 
that form our bond of trust with the people. They are specific. They are real. 
Judge us on them. Have trust in us and we will repay that trust.
Our mission in politics is to rebuild this bond of trust between government and 
the people. That is the only way democracy can flourish. I pledge to Britain a 
government which shares their hopes, which understands their fears, and which 
will work as partners with and for all our people, not just the privileged few. 
This is our contract with the people. 
Over the five years of a Labour government:
1 Education will be our number one priority, and we will increase the share of 
national income spent on education as we decrease it on the bills of economic 
and social failure 
2 There will be no increase in the basic or top rates of income tax 
3 We will provide stable economic growth with low inflation, and promote dynamic 
and competitive business and industry at home and abroad 
4 We will get 250,000 young unemployed off benefit and into work 
5 We will rebuild the NHS, reducing spending on administration and increasing 
spending on patient care 
6 We will be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime, and halve the time 
it takes persistent juvenile offenders to come to court 
7 We will help build strong families and strong communities, and lay the 
foundations of a modern welfare state in pensions and community care 
8 We will safeguard our environment, and develop an integrated transport policy 
to fight congestion and pollution 
9 We will clean up politics, decentralise political power throughout the United 
Kingdom and put the funding of political parties on a proper and accountable 
basis 
10 We will give Britain the leadership in Europe which Britain and Europe need 
We have modernised the Labour Party and we will modernise Britain. This means 
knowing where we want to go; being clear-headed about the country's future; 
telling the truth; making tough choices; insisting that all parts of the public 
sector live within their means; taking on vested interests that hold people 
back; standing up to unreasonable demands from any quarter; and being prepared 
to give a moral lead where government has responsibilities it should not avoid.
Britain does deserve better. And new Labour will be better for Britain. 
Tony Blair 


A copy of the manifesto is available in Braille and on cassette. Please phone 
0171 277 3410 
Visit Labour's general election website at www.labourwin97.org.uk (no longer 
available) 



We will make education our number one priority
  Cut class sizes to 30 or under for 5, 6 and 7 year-olds 
  Nursery places for all four year-olds 
  Attack low standards in schools 
  Access to computer technology 
  Lifelong learning through a new University for Industry 
  More spending on education as the cost of unemployment falls 
Education has been the Tories' biggest failure. It is Labour's number one 
priority.
It is not just good for the individual. It is an economic necessity for the 
nation. We will compete successfully on the basis of quality or not at all. And 
quality comes from developing the potential of all our people. It is the people 
who are our greatest natural asset. We will ensure they can fulfil their 
potential.
Nearly half of 11 year-olds in England and Wales fail to reach expected 
standards in English and maths. Britain has a smaller share of 17 and 18 
year-olds in full-time education than any major industrial nation. Nearly two 
thirds of the British workforce lack vocational qualifications.
There are excellent schools in Britain's state education system. But far too 
many children are denied the opportunity to succeed. Our task is to raise the 
standards of every school.
We will put behind us the old arguments that have bedevilled education in this 
country. We reject the Tories' obsession with school structures: all parents 
should be offered real choice through good quality schools, each with its own 
strengths and individual ethos. There should be no return to the 11-plus. It 
divides children into successes and failures at far too early an age.
We must modernise comprehensive schools. Children are not all of the same 
ability, nor do they learn at the same speed. That means 'setting' children in 
classes to maximise progress, for the benefit of high-fliers and slower learners 
alike. The focus must be on levelling up, not levelling down.
With Labour, the Department for Education and Employment will become a leading 
office of state. It will give a strong and consistent lead to help raise 
standards in every school. Standards, more than structures, are the key to 
success. Labour will never put dogma before children's education. Our approach 
will be to intervene where there are problems, not where schools are succeeding.
Labour will never force the abolition of good schools whether in the private or 
state sector. Any changes in the admissions policies of grammar schools will be 
decided by local parents. Church schools will retain their distinctive religious 
ethos.
We wish to build bridges wherever we can across education divides. The 
educational apartheid created by the public/private divide diminishes the whole 
education system. 
Zero tolerance of underperformance
Every school has the capacity to succeed. All Local Education Authorities (LEAs) 
must demonstrate that every school is improving. For those failing schools 
unable to improve, ministers will order a 'fresh start' - close the school and 
start afresh on the same site. Where good schools and bad schools coexist side 
by side we will authorise LEAs to allow one school to take over the other to set 
the underperforming school on a new path. 
Quality nursery education guaranteed for all four year-olds
Nursery vouchers have been proven not to work. They are costly and do not 
generate more quality nursery places. We will use the money saved by scrapping 
nursery vouchers to guarantee places for four year-olds. We will invite selected 
local authorities to pilot early excellence centres combining education and care 
for the under-fives. We will set targets for universal provision for three 
year-olds whose parents want it. 
New focus on standards in primary schools
Primary schools are the key to mastering the basics and developing in every 
child an eagerness to learn.
Every school needs baseline assessment of pupils when they enter the school, and 
a year-on-year target for improvement.
We will reduce class sizes for five, six and seven year-olds to 30 or under, by 
phasing out the assisted places scheme, the cost of which is set to rise to £180 
million per year.
We must recognise the three 'r's for what they are - building blocks of all 
learning that must be taught better. We will achieve this by improving the 
skills of the teaching force; ensuring a stronger focus on literacy in the 
curriculum; and piloting literacy summer schools to meet our new target that 
within a decade every child leaves primary school with a reading age of at least 
11 (barely half do today).
Our numeracy taskforce will develop equally ambitious targets. We will encourage 
the use of the most effective teaching methods, including phonics for reading 
and whole class interactive teaching for maths. 
Attacking educational disadvantage
No matter where a school is, Labour will not tolerate under-achievement.
Public/private partnerships will improve the condition of school buildings.
There will be education action zones to attack low standards by recruiting the 
best teachers and head teachers to under-achieving schools; by supporting 
voluntary mentoring schemes to provide one-to-one support for disadvantaged 
pupils; and by creating new opportunities for children, after the age of 14, to 
enhance their studies by acquiring knowledge and experience within industry and 
commerce.
To attack under-achievement in urban areas, we have developed a new scheme with 
the Premier League. In partnerships between central government, local government 
and football clubs, study support centres will be set up at Premier League 
grounds for the benefit of local children. The scheme will be launched on a 
pilot basis during the 1997/8 season.
We support the greatest possible integration into mainstream education of pupils 
with special educational needs, while recognising that specialist facilities are 
essential to meet particular needs. 
Realising the potential of new technology
Labour is the pioneer of new thinking. We have agreed with British Telecom and 
the cable companies that they will wire up schools, libraries, colleges and 
hospitals to the information superhighway free of charge. We have also secured 
agreement to make access charges as low as possible.
For the Internet we plan a National Grid for Learning, franchised as a 
public/private partnership, which will bring to teachers up-to-date materials to 
enhance their skills, and to children high-quality educational materials. We 
will use lottery money to improve the skills of existing teachers in information 
technology.
In opposition, Labour set up the independent Stevenson Commission to promote 
access for children to new technology. Its recent report is a challenging 
programme for the future. We are urgently examining how to implement its plans, 
in particular the development of educational software through a grading system 
which will provide schools with guarantees of product quality; and the provision 
for every child of an individual email address. An independent standing 
committee will continue to advise us on the implementation of our plans in 
government. 
The role of parents
We will increase the powers and responsibilities of parents.
There will be more parent governors and, for the first time, parent 
representatives on LEAs.
A major objective is to promote a culture of responsibility for learning within 
the family, through contracts between all schools and parents, defining the 
responsibilities of each. National guidelines will establish minimum periods for 
homework for primary and secondary school pupils.
Teachers will be entitled to positive support from parents to promote good 
attendance and sound discipline. Schools suffer from unruly and disruptive 
pupils. Exclusion or suspension may sometimes be necessary. We will, however, 
pilot new pupil referral units so that schools are protected but these pupils 
are not lost to education or the country. 
New job description for LEAs
The judge and jury of LEA performance will be their contribution to raising 
standards.
LEAs are closer to schools than central government, and have the authority of 
being locally elected. But they will be required to devolve power, and more of 
their budgets, to heads and governors. LEA performance will be inspected by 
Ofsted and the Audit Commission. Where authorities are deemed to be failing, the 
secretary of state may suspend the relevant powers of the LEA and send in an 
improvement team. 
Grant maintained schools
Schools that are now grant maintained will prosper with Labour's proposals, as 
will every school.
Tory claims that Labour will close these schools are false. The system of 
funding will not discriminate unfairly either between schools or between pupils. 
LEAs will be represented on governing bodies, but will not control them. We 
support guidelines for open and fair admissions, along the lines of those 
introduced in 1993; but we will also provide a right of appeal to an independent 
panel in disputed cases. 
Teachers: pressure and support
Schools are critically dependent on the quality of all staff. The majority of 
teachers are skilful and dedicated, but some fall short. We will improve teacher 
training, and ensure that all teachers have an induction year when they first 
qualify, to ensure their suitability for teaching.
There will be a general teaching council to speak for and raise standards in the 
profession. We will create a new grade of teachers to recognise the best. There 
will, however, be speedy, but fair, procedures to remove teachers who cannot do 
the job.
The strength of a school is critically dependent on the quality of its head. We 
will establish mandatory qualifications for the post. A head teacher will be 
appointed to a position only when fully trained to accept the responsibility. 
Higher education
The improvement and expansion needed cannot be funded out of general taxation. 
Our proposals for funding have been made to the Dearing Committee, in line with 
successful policies abroad.
The costs of student maintenance should be repaid by graduates on an 
income-related basis, from the career success to which higher education has 
contributed. The current system is badly administered and payback periods are 
too short. We will provide efficient administration, with fairness ensured by 
longer payback periods where required. 
Lifelong learning
We must learn throughout life, to retain employment through new and improved 
skills. We will promote adult learning both at work and in the critical sector 
of further education.
In schools and colleges, we support broader A-levels and upgraded vocational 
qualifications, underpinned by rigorous standards and key skills.
Employers have the primary responsibility for training their workforces in 
job-related skills. But individuals should be given the power to invest in 
training. We will invest public money for training in Individual Learning 
Accounts which individuals - for example women returning to the labour force - 
can then use to gain the skills they want. We will kickstart the programme for 
up to a million people, using £150 million of TEC money which could be better 
used and which would provide a contribution of £150, alongside individuals 
making small investments of their own. Employers will be encouraged to make 
voluntary contributions to these funds. We will also promote the extension of 
the Investors in People initiative into many more small firms.
Our new University for Industry, collaborating with the Open University, will 
bring new opportunities to adults seeking to develop their potential. This will 
bring government, industry and education together to create a new resource whose 
remit will be to use new technology to enhance skills and education. The 
University for Industry will be a public/private partnership, commissioning 
software and developing the links to extend lifelong learning. 
Government spending on education
The Conservatives have cut government spending on education as a share of 
national income by the equivalent of more than £3 billion as spending on the 
bills of economic and social failure has risen. We are committed to reversing 
this trend of spending. Over the course of a five-year Parliament, as we cut the 
costs of economic and social failure we will raise the proportion of national 
income spent on education. 
We will promote personal prosperity for all
  Economic stability to promote investment 
  Tough inflation target, mortgage rates as low as possible 
  Stick for two years within existing spending limits 
  Five-year pledge: no increase in income tax rates 
  Long-term objective of ten pence starting rate of income tax 
  Early Budget to get people off welfare and into work 
The Conservatives have in 18 years created the two longest, deepest recessions 
this century. 
We have experienced the slowest average growth rate of any similar period since 
the second world war. There has been a fundamental failure to tackle the 
underlying causes of inflation, of low growth and of unemployment. These are: 
  too much economic instability, with wild swings from boom to bust 
  too little investment in education and skills, and in the application of new 
  technologies 
  too few opportunities to find jobs, start new businesses or become 
  self-employed 
  too narrow an industrial base and too little sense of common purpose in the 
  workplace or across the nation. 
Britain can do better. We must build on the British qualities of inventiveness, 
creativity and adaptability. New Labour's objective is to improve living 
standards for the many, not just the few. Business can and must succeed in 
raising productivity. This requires a combination of a skilled and educated 
workforce with investment in the latest technological innovations, as the route 
to higher wages and employment.
An explicit objective of a Labour government will be to raise the trend rate of 
growth by strengthening our wealth-creating base. We will nurture investment in 
industry, skills, infrastructure and new technologies. And we will attack 
long-term unemployment, especially among young people. Our goal will be 
educational and employment opportunities for all.
Economic stability is the essential platform for sustained growth. In a global 
economy the route to growth is stability not inflation. The priority must be 
stable, low-inflation conditions for long-term growth. The root causes of 
inflation and low growth are the same - an economic and industrial base that 
remains weak. Government cannot solve all economic problems or end the economic 
cycle. But by spending wisely and taxing fairly, government can help tackle the 
problems. Our goals are low inflation, rising living standards and high and 
stable levels of employment. 
Spending and tax: new Labour's approach
The myth that the solution to every problem is increased spending has been 
comprehensively dispelled under the Conservatives. Spending has risen. But more 
spending has brought neither greater fairness nor less poverty. Quite the 
reverse - our society is more divided than it has been for generations. The 
level of public spending is no longer the best measure of the effectiveness of 
government action in the public interest. It is what money is actually spent on 
that counts more than how much money is spent.
The national debt has doubled under John Major. The public finances remain weak. 
A new Labour government will give immediate high priority to seeing how public 
money can be better used. 
New Labour will be wise spenders, not big spenders. We will work in partnership 
with the private sector to achieve our goals. We will ask about public spending 
the first question that a manager in any company would ask - can existing 
resources be used more effectively to meet our priorities? And because 
efficiency and value for money are central, ministers will be required to save 
before they spend. 
Save to invest is our approach, not tax and spend. 
The increase in taxes under the Conservatives is the most dramatic evidence of 
economic failure. Since 1992 the typical family has paid more than £2,000 in 
extra taxes - the biggest tax hike in peacetime history, breaking every promise 
made by John Major at the last election. The tragedy is that those hardest hit 
are least able to pay. That is why we strongly opposed the imposition of VAT on 
fuel: it was Labour that stopped the government from increasing VAT on fuel to 
17. 5 per cent. 
Taxation is not neutral in the way it raises revenue. How and what governments 
tax sends clear signals about the economic activities they believe should be 
encouraged or discouraged, and the values they wish to entrench in society. Just 
as, for example, work should be encouraged through the tax system, environmental 
pollution should be discouraged.
New Labour will establish a new trust on tax with the British people. The 
promises we make we will keep. The principles that will underpin our tax policy 
are clear: 
  to encourage employment opportunities and work incentives for all 
  to promote savings and investment 
  and to be fair and be seen to be fair. 
New Labour is not about high taxes on ordinary families. It is about social 
justice and a fair deal.
New Labour therefore makes the following economic pledges. 
Fair taxes
There will be no return to the penal tax rates that existed under both Labour 
and Conservative governments in the 1970s.
To encourage work and reward effort, we are pledged not to raise the basic or 
top rates of income tax throughout the next Parliament.
Our long-term objective is a lower starting rate of income tax of ten pence in 
the pound. Reducing the high marginal rates at the bottom end of the earning 
scale - often 70 or 80 per cent - is not only fair but desirable to encourage 
employment.
This goal will benefit the many, not the few. It is in sharp contrast to the 
Tory goal of abolishing capital gains and inheritance tax, at least half the 
benefit of which will go to the richest 5,000 families in the country.
We will cut VAT on fuel to five per cent, the lowest level allowed. 
We renew our pledge not to extend VAT to food, children's clothes, books and 
newspapers and public transport fares.
We will also examine the interaction of the tax and benefits systems so that 
they can be streamlined and modernised, so as to fulfil our objectives of 
promoting work incentives, reducing poverty and welfare dependency, and 
strengthening community and family life. 
No risks with inflation
We will match the current target for low and stable inflation of 2. 5 per cent 
or less. We will reform the Bank of England to ensure that decision-making on 
monetary policy is more effective, open, accountable and free from short-term 
political manipulation. 
Strict rules for government borrowing
We will enforce the 'golden rule' of public spending - over the economic cycle, 
we will only borrow to invest and not to fund current expenditure.
We will ensure that - over the economic cycle - public debt as a proportion of 
national income is at a stable and prudent level. 
Stick to planned public spending allocations for the first two years of office
Our decisions have not been taken lightly. They are a recognition of 
Conservative mismanagement of the public finances. For the next two years Labour 
will work within the departmental ceilings for spending already announced. We 
will resist unreasonable demands on the public purse, including any unreasonable 
public sector pay demands. 
Switch spending from economic failure to investment
We will conduct a central spending review and departmental reviews to assess how 
to use resources better, while rooting out waste and inefficiency in public 
spending. 
Labour priorities in public spending are different from Tory priorities. 
Tax reform to promote saving and investment
We will introduce a new individual savings account and extend the principle of 
TESSAs and PEPs to promote long-term saving. We will review the corporate and 
capital gains tax regimes to see how the tax system can promote greater 
long-term investment. 
Labour's welfare-to-work Budget
We will introduce a Budget within two months after the election to begin the 
task of equipping the British economy and reforming the welfare state to get 
young people and the long-term unemployed back to work. This welfare-to-work 
programme will be funded by a windfall levy on the excess profits of the 
privatised utilities, introduced in this Budget after we have consulted the 
regulators. 
We will help create successful and profitable businesses
  Backing business: skills, infrastructure, new markets 
  Gains for consumers with tough competition law 
  New measures to help small businesses 
  National minimum wage to tackle low pay 
  Boost local economic growth with Regional Development Agencies 
  A strong and effective voice in Europe 
New Labour offers business a new deal for the future. We will leave intact the 
main changes of the 1980s in industrial relations and enterprise. We see healthy 
profits as an essential motor of a dynamic market economy, and believe they 
depend on quality products, innovative entrepreneurs and skilled employees. We 
will build a new partnership with business to improve the competitiveness of 
British industry for the 21st century, leading to faster growth.
Many of the fundamentals of the British economy are still weak. Low pay and low 
skills go together: insecurity is the consequence of economic instability; the 
absence of quality jobs is a product of the weakness of our industrial base; we 
suffer from both high unemployment and skills shortages. There is no future for 
Britain as a low wage economy: we cannot compete on wages with countries paying 
a tenth or a hundredth of British wages.
We need to win on higher quality, skill, innovation and reliability. With 
Labour, British and inward investors will find this country an attractive and 
profitable place to do business.
New Labour believes in a flexible labour market that serves employers and 
employees alike. But flexibility alone is not enough. We need 'flexibility 
plus': 
  plus higher skills and higher standards in our schools and colleges 
  plus policies to ensure economic stability 
  plus partnership with business to raise investment in infrastructure, science 
  and research and to back small firms 
  plus new leadership from Britain to reform Europe, in place of the current 
  policy of drift and disengagement from our largest market 
  plus guaranteeing Britain's membership of the single market - indeed opening 
  up further markets inside and outside the EU - helping make Britain an 
  attractive place to do business 
  plus minimum standards of fair treatment, including a national minimum wage 
  plus an imaginative welfare-to-work programme to put the long-term unemployed 
  back to work and to cut social security costs. 
A reformed and tougher competition law
Competitiveness abroad must begin with competition at home. Effective 
competition can bring value and quality to consumers. As an early priority we 
will reform Britain's competition law. We will adopt a tough 'prohibitive' 
approach to deter anti-competitive practices and abuses of market power.
In the utility industries we will promote competition wherever possible. Where 
competition is not an effective discipline, for example in the water industry 
which has a poor environmental record and has in most cases been a tax-free 
zone, we will pursue tough, efficient regulation in the interests of customers, 
and, in the case of water, in the interests of the environment as well. We 
recognise the need for open and predictable regulation which is fair both to 
consumers and to shareholders and at the same time provides incentives for 
managers to innovate and improve efficiency. 
Reinvigorate the Private Finance Initiative
Britain's infrastructure is dangerously run down: parts of our road and rail 
network are seriously neglected, and all too often our urban environment has 
been allowed to deteriorate.
Labour pioneered the idea of public/private partnerships. It is Labour local 
authorities which have done most to create these partnerships at local level.
A Labour government will overcome the problems that have plagued the PFI at a 
national level. We will set priorities between projects, saving time and 
expense; we will seek a realistic allocation of risk between the partners to a 
project; and we will ensure that best practice is spread throughout government. 
We will aim to simplify and speed up the planning process for major 
infrastructure projects of vital national interest.
We will ensure that self-financing commercial organisations within the public 
sector - the Post Office is a prime example - are given greater commercial 
freedom to make the most of new opportunities. 
Backing small business
The number of small employers has declined by half a million since 1990. Support 
for small businesses will have a major role in our plans for economic growth. We 
will cut unnecessary red tape; provide for statutory interest on late payment of 
debts; improve support for high-tech start-ups; improve the quality and 
relevance of advice and training through a reformed Business Links network and 
the University for Industry; and assist firms to enter overseas markets more 
effectively. 
Local economic growth
Prosperity needs to be built from the bottom up. We will establish one-stop 
regional development agencies to co-ordinate regional economic development, help 
small business and encourage inward investment. Many regions are already taking 
informal steps to this end and they will be supported. 
Strengthen our capability in science, technology and design
The UK must be positively committed to the global pursuit of new knowledge, with 
a strong science base in our universities and centres of excellence leading the 
world. The Dearing Committee represents a significant opportunity to promote 
high-quality standards in science teaching and research throughout UK higher 
education. We support a collaborative approach between researchers and business, 
spreading the use of new technology and good design, and exploiting our own 
inventions to boost business in the UK. 
Promoting new green technologies and businesses
There is huge potential to develop Britain's environmental technology industries 
to create jobs, win exports and protect the environment.
Effective environmental management is an increasingly important component of 
modern business practice. We support a major push to promote energy conservation 
- particularly by the promotion of home energy efficiency schemes, linked to our 
environment taskforce for the under-25s. We are committed to an energy policy 
designed to promote cleaner, more efficient energy use and production, including 
a new and strong drive to develop renewable energy sources such as solar and 
wind energy, and combined heat and power. We see no economic case for the 
building of any new nuclear power stations. 
Key elements of the 1980s trade union reforms to stay
There must be minimum standards for the individual at work, including a minimum 
wage, within a flexible labour market. We need a sensible balance in industrial 
relations law - rights and duties go together.
The key elements of the trade union legislation of the 1980s will stay - on 
ballots, picketing and industrial action. People should be free to join or not 
to join a union. Where they do decide to join, and where a majority of the 
relevant workforce vote in a ballot for the union to represent them, the union 
should be recognised. This promotes stable and orderly industrial relations. 
There will be full consultation on the most effective means of implementing this 
proposal. 
Partnership at work
The best companies recognise their employees as partners in the enterprise. 
Employees whose conditions are good are more committed to their companies and 
are more productive. Many unions and employers are embracing partnership in 
place of conflict. Government should welcome this.
We are keen to encourage a variety of forms of partnership and enterprise, 
spreading ownership and encouraging more employees to become owners through 
Employee Share Ownership Plans and co-operatives. We support too the Social 
Chapter of the EU, but will deploy our influence in Europe to ensure that it 
develops so as to promote employability and competitiveness, not inflexibility. 
A sensibly set national minimum wage
There should be a statutory level beneath which pay should not fall - with the 
minimum wage decided not on the basis of a rigid formula but according to the 
economic circumstances of the time and with the advice of an independent low pay 
commission, whose membership will include representatives of employers, 
including small business, and employees.
Every modern industrial country has a minimum wage, including the US and Japan. 
Britain used to have minimum wages through the Wages Councils. Introduced 
sensibly, the minimum wage will remove the worst excesses of low pay (and be of 
particular benefit to women), while cutting some of the massive £4 billion 
benefits bill by which the taxpayer subsidises companies that pay very low 
wages. 
We will get the unemployed from welfare to work
  Stop the growth of an 'underclass' in Britain 
  250,000 young unemployed off benefit and into work 
  Tax cuts for employers who create new jobs for the long-term unemployed 
  Effective help for lone parents 
There are over one million fewer jobs in Britain than in 1990. One in five 
families has no one working. One million single mothers are trapped on benefits. 
There is a wider gap between rich and poor than for generations.
We are determined not to continue down the road of a permanent have-not class, 
unemployed and disaffected from society. Our long-term objective is high and 
stable levels of employment. This is the true meaning of a stakeholder economy - 
where everyone has a stake in society and owes responsibilities to it.
The best way to tackle poverty is to help people into jobs - real jobs. The 
unemployed have a responsibility to take up the opportunity of training places 
or work, but these must be real opportunities. The government's workfare 
proposals - with a success rate of one in ten - fail this test.
Labour's welfare-to-work programme will attack unemployment and break the spiral 
of escalating spending on social security. A one-off windfall levy on the excess 
profits of the privatised utilities will fund our ambitious programme. 
Every young person unemployed for more than six months in a job or training
We will give 250,000 under-25s opportunities for work, education and training. 
Four options will be on offer, each involving day-release education or training 
leading to a qualification: private-sector job: employers will be offered a 60 
pound-a-week rebate for six months work with a non-profit voluntary sector 
employer, paying a weekly wage, equivalent to benefit plus a fixed sum for six 
months full-time study for young people without qualifications on an approved 
course a job with the environment taskforce, linked to Labour's citizens' 
service programme. Rights and responsibilities must go hand in hand, without a 
fifth option of life on full benefit. 
Every 16 and 17 year-old on the road to a proper qualification by the year 2000
Nearly a third of young people do not achieve an NVQ level two qualification by 
age 19. All young people will be offered part-time or full-time education after 
the age of 16. Any under-18 year-old in a job will have the right to study on an 
approved course for qualifications at college. We will replace the failed Youth 
Training scheme with our new Target 2000 programme, offering young people 
high-quality education and training. 
Action on long-term unemployment
New partnerships between government and business, fully involving local 
authorities and the voluntary sector, will attack long-term joblessness. We will 
encourage employers to take on those who have suffered unemployment for more 
than two years with a 75 pound-a-week tax rebate paid for six months, financed 
by the windfall levy. Our programme for the phased release of past receipts from 
council house sales will provide new jobs in the construction industry. 
Lone parents into work
Today the main connection between unemployed lone parents and the state is their 
benefits. Most lone parents want to work, but are given no help to find it. New 
Labour has a positive policy. Once the youngest child is in the second term of 
full-time school, lone parents will be offered advice by a proactive Employment 
Service to develop a package of job search, training and after-school care to 
help them off benefit. 
Customised, personalised services
We favour initiatives with new combinations of available benefits to suit 
individual circumstances. In new and innovative 'Employment Zones', personal job 
accounts will combine money currently available for benefits and training, to 
offer the unemployed new options - leading to work and independence. We will 
co-ordinate benefits, employment and career services, and utilise new technology 
to improve their quality and efficiency. 
Fraud
Just as we owe it to the taxpayer to crack down on tax avoidance, so we must 
crack down on dishonesty in the benefit system. We will start with a clampdown 
on Housing Benefit fraud, estimated to cost £2 billion a year, and will maintain 
action against benefit fraud of all kinds. 
We will save the NHS
  100,000 people off waiting lists 
  End the Tory internal market 
  End waiting for cancer surgery 
  Tough quality targets for hospitals 
  Independent food standards agency 
  New public health drive 
  Raise spending in real terms every year - and spend the money on patients not 
  bureaucracy 
Labour created the NHS 50 years ago. It is under threat from the Conservatives. 
We want to save and modernise the NHS.
But if the Conservatives are elected again there may well not be an NHS in five 
years' time - neither national nor comprehensive. Labour commits itself anew to 
the historic principle: that if you are ill or injured there will be a national 
health service there to help; and access to it will be based on need and need 
alone - not on your ability to pay, or on who your GP happens to be or on where 
you live.
In 1990 the Conservatives imposed on the NHS a complex internal market of 
hospitals competing to win contracts from health authorities and fundholding 
GPs. The result is an NHS strangled by costly red tape, with every individual 
transaction the subject of a separate invoice. After six years, bureaucracy 
swallows an extra £1.5 billion per year; there are 20,000 more managers and 
50,000 fewer nurses on the wards; and more than one million people are on 
waiting lists. The government has consistently failed to meet even its own 
health targets.
There can be no return to top-down management, but Labour will end the 
Conservatives' internal market in healthcare. The planning and provision of care 
are necessary and distinct functions, and will remain so. But under the Tories, 
the administrative costs of purchasing care have undermined provision and the 
market system has distorted clinical priorities. Labour will cut costs by 
removing the bureaucratic processes of the internal market.
The savings achieved will go on direct care for patients. As a start, the first 
£100 million saved will treat an extra 100,000 patients. We will end waiting for 
cancer surgery, thereby helping thousands of women waiting for breast cancer 
treatment. 
Primary care will play a lead role
In recent years, GPs have gained power on behalf of their patients in a changed 
relationship with consultants, and we support this. But the development of GP 
fundholding has also brought disadvantages. Decision-making has been fragmented. 
Administrative costs have grown. And a two-tier service has resulted.
Labour will retain the lead role for primary care but remove the disadvantages 
that have come from the present system. GPs and nurses will take the lead in 
combining together locally to plan local health services more efficiently for 
all the patients in their area. This will enable all GPs in an area to bring 
their combined strength to bear upon individual hospitals to secure higher 
standards of patient provision. In making this change, we will build on the 
existing collaborative schemes which already serve 14 million people.
The current system of year-on-year contracts is costly and unstable. We will 
introduce three- to five-year agreements between the local primary care teams 
and hospitals. Hospitals will then be better able to plan work at full capacity 
and co-operate to enhance patient services. 
Higher-quality services for patients
Hospitals will retain their autonomy over day-to-day administrative functions, 
but, as part of the NHS, they will be required to meet high-quality standards in 
the provision of care. Management will be held to account for performance 
levels. Boards will become more representative of the local communities they 
serve. A new patients' charter will concentrate on the quality and success of 
treatment. The Tories' so-called 'Efficiency Index' counts the number of patient 
'episodes', not the quality or success of treatment. With Labour, the measure 
will be quality of outcome, itself an incentive for effectiveness. As part of 
our concern to ensure quality, we will work towards the elimination of mixed-sex 
wards.
Health authorities will become the guardians of high standards. They will 
monitor services, spread best practice and ensure rising standards of care.
The Tory attempt to use private money to build hospitals has failed to deliver. 
Labour will overcome the problems that have plagued the Private Finance 
Initiative, end the delays, sort out the confusion and develop new forms of 
public/private partnership that work better and protect the interests of the 
NHS. Labour is opposed to the privatisation of clinical services which is being 
actively promoted by the Conservatives.
Labour will promote new developments in telemedicine - bringing expert advice 
from regional centres of excellence to neighbourhood level using new technology. 

Good health
A new minister for public health will attack the root causes of ill health, and 
so improve lives and save the NHS money. Labour will set new goals for improving 
the overall health of the nation which recognise the impact that poverty, poor 
housing, unemployment and a polluted environment have on health.
Smoking is the greatest single cause of preventable illness and premature death 
in the UK. We will therefore ban tobacco advertising.
Labour will establish an independent food standards agency. The £3.5 billion BSE 
crisis and the E. coli outbreak which resulted in serious loss of life, have 
made unanswerable the case for the independent agency we have proposed. 
NHS spending
The Conservatives have wasted spending on the NHS. We will do better. We will 
raise spending on the NHS in real terms every year and put the money towards 
patient care. And a greater proportion of every pound spent will go on patient 
care not bureaucracy. 
An NHS for the future
The NHS requires continuity as well as change, or the system cannot cope. There 
must be pilots to ensure that change works. And there must be flexibility, not 
rigid prescription, if innovation is to flourish. 
Our fundamental purpose is simple but hugely important: to restore the NHS as a 
public service working co-operatively for patients, not a commercial business 
driven by competition. 
We will be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime
  Fast-track punishment for persistent young offenders 
  Reform Crown Prosecution Service to convict more criminals 
  Police on the beat not pushing paper 
  Crackdown on petty crimes and neighbourhood disorder 
  Fresh parliamentary vote to ban all handguns 
Under the Conservatives, crime has doubled and many more criminals get away with 
their crimes: the number of people convicted has fallen by a third, with only 
one crime in 50 leading to a conviction. This is the worst record of any 
government since the Second World War - and for England and Wales the worst 
record of any major industrialised country. Last year alone violent crime rose 
11 per cent.
We propose a new approach to law and order: tough on crime and tough on the 
causes of crime. We insist on individual responsibility for crime, and will 
attack the causes of crime by our measures to relieve social deprivation.
The police have our strong support. They are in the front line of the fight 
against crime and disorder. The Conservatives have broken their 1992 general 
election pledge to provide an extra 1,000 police officers. We will relieve the 
police of unnecessary bureaucratic burdens to get more officers back on the 
beat. 
Youth crime
Youth crime and disorder have risen sharply, but very few young offenders end up 
in court, and when they do half are let off with another warning. Young 
offenders account for seven million crimes a year.
Far too often young criminals offend again and again while waiting months for a 
court hearing. We will halve the time it takes to get persistent young offenders 
from arrest to sentencing; replace widespread repeat cautions with a single 
final warning; bring together Youth Offender Teams in every area; and streamline 
the system of youth courts to make it far more effective.
New parental responsibility orders will make parents face up to their 
responsibility for their children's misbehaviour. 
Conviction and sentencing
The job of the Crown Prosecution Service is to prosecute criminals effectively. 
There is strong evidence that the CPS is over-centralised, bureaucratic and 
inefficient, with cases too often dropped, delayed, or downgraded to lesser 
offences.
Labour will decentralise the CPS, with local crown prosecutors co-operating more 
effectively with local police forces.
We will implement an effective sentencing system for all the main offences to 
ensure greater consistency and stricter punishment for serious repeat offenders. 
The courts will have to spell out what each sentence really means in practice. 
The Court of Appeal will have a duty to lay down sentencing guidelines for all 
the main offences. The attorney general's power to appeal unduly lenient 
sentences will be extended.
The prison service now faces serious financial problems. We will audit the 
resources available, take proper ministerial responsibility for the service, and 
seek to ensure that prison regimes are constructive and require inmates to face 
up to their offending behaviour. 
Disorder
The Conservatives have forgotten the 'order' part of 'law and order'. We will 
tackle the unacceptable level of anti-social behaviour and crime on our streets. 
Our 'zero tolerance' approach will ensure that petty criminality among young 
offenders is seriously addressed.
Community safety orders will deal with threatening and disruptive criminal 
neighbours. Labour has taken the lead in proposing action to tackle the problems 
of stalking and domestic violence.
Child protection orders will deal with young children suffering neglect by 
parents because they are left out on their own far too late at night.
Britain is a multiracial and multicultural society. All its members must have 
the protection of the law. We will create a new offence of racial harassment and 
a new crime of racially motivated violence to protect ethnic minorities from 
intimidation. 
Drugs
The vicious circle of drugs and crime wrecks lives and threatens communities. 
Labour will appoint an anti-drugs supremo to co-ordinate our battle against 
drugs across all government departments. The 'drug czar' will be a symbol of our 
commitment to tackle the modern menace of drugs in our communities.
We will pilot the use of compulsory drug testing and treatment orders for 
offenders to ensure that the link between drug addiction and crime is broken. 
This will be paid for by bringing remand delays down to the national targets.
We will attack the drug problem in prisons. In addition to random drug testing 
of all prisoners we will aim for a voluntary testing unit in every prison for 
prisoners ready to prove they are drug-free. 
Victims
Victims of crime are too often neglected by the criminal justice system. We will 
ensure that victims are kept fully informed of the progress of their case, and 
why charges may have been downgraded or dropped.
Greater protection will be provided for victims in rape and serious sexual 
offence trials and for those subject to intimidation, including witnesses. 
Prevention
We will place a new responsibility on local authorities to develop statutory 
partnerships to help prevent crime. Local councils will then be required to set 
targets for the reduction of crime and disorder in their area. 
Gun control
In the wake of Dunblane and Hungerford, it is clear that only the strictest 
firearms laws can provide maximum safety. The Conservatives failed to offer the 
protection required. Labour led the call for an outright ban on all handguns in 
general civilian use. There will be legislation to allow individual MPs a free 
vote for a complete ban on handguns.
Labour is the party of law and order in Britain today. 
We will strengthen family life
  Help parents balance work and family 
  Security in housing and help for homeowners 
  Tackle homelessness using receipts from council house sales 
  Dignity and security in retirement 
  Protect the basic state pension and promote secure second pensions 
We will uphold family life as the most secure means of bringing up our children. 
Families are the core of our society. They should teach right from wrong. They 
should be the first defence against anti-social behaviour. The breakdown of 
family life damages the fabric of our society.
Labour does not see families and the state as rival providers for the needs of 
our citizens. Families should provide the day-to-day support for children to be 
brought up in a stable and loving environment. But families cannot flourish 
unless government plays its distinctive role: in education; where necessary, in 
caring for the young; in making adequate provision for illness and old age; in 
supporting good parenting; and in protecting families from lawlessness and abuse 
of power. Society, through government, must assist families to achieve 
collectively what no family can achieve alone.
Yet families in Britain today are under strain as never before. The security 
once offered by the health service has been undermined. Streets are not safe. 
Housing insecurity grows. One in five non-pensioner families has no one working; 
and British men work the longest hours in Europe.
The clock should not be turned back. As many women who want to work should be 
able to do so. More equal relationships between men and women have transformed 
our lives. Equally, our attitudes to race, sex and sexuality have changed 
fundamentally. Our task is to combine change and social stability. 
Work and family
Families without work are without independence. This is why we give so much 
emphasis to our welfare-to-work policies.
Labour's national childcare strategy will plan provision to match the 
requirements of the modern labour market and help parents, especially women, to 
balance family and working life.
There must be a sound balance between support for family life and the protection 
of business from undue burdens - a balance which some of the most successful 
businesses already strike. The current government has shown itself wholly 
insensitive to the need to help develop family-friendly working practices. While 
recognising the need for flexibility in implementation and for certain 
exemptions, we support the right of employees not to be forced to work more than 
48 hours a week; to an annual holiday entitlement; and to limited unpaid 
parental leave. These measures will provide a valuable underpinning to family 
life.
The rights of part-time workers have been clarified by recent court judgements 
which we welcome.
We will keep under continuous review all aspects of the tax and benefits systems 
to ensure that they are supportive of families and children. We are committed to 
retain universal Child Benefit where it is universal today - from birth to age 
16 - and to uprate it at least in line with prices. We are reviewing educational 
finance and maintenance for those older than 16 to ensure higher staying-on 
rates at school and college, and that resources are used to support those in 
most need. This review will continue in government on the guidelines we have 
already laid down. 
Security in housing
Most families want to own their own homes. We will also support efficiently run 
social and private rented sectors offering quality and choice.
The Conservatives' failure on housing has been twofold. The two thirds of 
families who own their homes have suffered a massive increase in insecurity over 
the last decade, with record mortgage arrears, record negative equity and record 
repossessions. And the Conservatives' lack of a housing strategy has led to the 
virtual abandonment of social housing, the growth of homelessness, and a failure 
to address fully leaseholder reform. All these are the Tory legacy.
Labour's housing strategy will address the needs of homeowners and tenants 
alike.
We will reject the boom and bust policies which caused the collapse of the 
housing market.
We will work with mortgage providers to encourage greater provision of more 
flexible mortgages to protect families in a world of increased job insecurity.
Mortgage buyers also require stronger consumer protection, for example by 
extension of the Financial Services Act, against the sale of disadvantageous 
mortgage packages.
The problems of gazumping have reappeared. Those who break their bargains should 
be liable to pay the costs inflicted on others, in particular legal and survey 
costs. We are consulting on the best way of tackling the problems of gazumping 
in the interests of responsible home buyers and sellers. 
The rented housing sector
We support a three-way partnership between the public, private and housing 
association sectors to promote good social housing. With Labour, capital 
receipts from the sale of council houses, received but not spent by local 
councils, will be re-invested in building new houses and rehabilitating old 
ones. This will be phased to match the capacity of the building industry and to 
meet the requirements of prudent economic management.
We also support effective schemes to deploy private finance to improve the 
public housing stock and to introduce greater diversity and choice. Such schemes 
should only go ahead with the support of the tenants concerned: we oppose the 
government's threat to hand over council housing to private landlords without 
the consent of tenants and with no guarantees on rents or security of tenure.
We value a revived private rented sector. We will provide protection where most 
needed: for tenants in houses in multiple occupation. There will be a proper 
system of licensing by local authorities which will benefit tenants and 
responsible landlords alike.
We will introduce 'commonhold', a new form of tenure enabling people living in 
flats to own their homes individually and to own the whole property 
collectively. We will simplify the current rules restricting the purchase of 
freeholds by leaseholders. 
Homelessness
Homelessness has more than doubled under the Conservatives. Today more than 
40,000 families in England are in expensive temporary accommodation. The 
government, in the face of Labour opposition, has removed the duty on local 
authorities to find permanent housing for homeless families. We will impose a 
new duty on local authorities to protect those who are homeless through no fault 
of their own and are in priority need.
There is no more powerful symbol of Tory neglect in our society today than young 
people without homes living rough on the streets. Young people emerging from 
care without any family support are particularly vulnerable. We will attack the 
problem in two principal ways: the phased release of capital receipts from 
council house sales will increase the stock of housing for rent; and our 
welfare-to-work programme will lead the young unemployed into work and financial 
independence. 
Older citizens
We value the positive contribution that older people make to our society, 
through their families, voluntary activities and work. Their skills and 
experience should be utilised within their communities. That is why, for 
example, we support the proposal to involve older people as volunteers to help 
children learn in pre-school and after-school clubs. In work, they should not be 
discriminated against because of their age.
The provision of adequate pensions in old age is a major challenge for the 
future. For today's pensioners Conservative policies have created real poverty, 
growing inequality and widespread insecurity.
The Conservatives would abolish the state-financed basic retirement pension and 
replace it with a privatised scheme, with a vague promise of a means-tested 
state guarantee if pensions fall beneath a minimum level. Their proposals mean 
there will be no savings on welfare spending for half a century; and taxes will 
have to rise to make provision for new privately funded pensions. Their plans 
require an additional £312 billion between now and 2040 through increased taxes 
or borrowing, against the hope of savings later, with no certainty of security 
in retirement at the end.
We believe that all pensioners should share fairly in the increasing prosperity 
of the nation. Instead of privatisation, we propose a partnership between public 
and private provision, and a balance between income sourced from tax and 
invested savings. The basic state pension will be retained as the foundation of 
pension provision. It will be increased at least in line with prices. We will 
examine means of delivering more automatic help to the poorest pensioners - one 
million of whom do not even receive the Income Support which is their present 
entitlement.
We will encourage saving for retirement, with proper protection for savings. We 
will reform the Financial Services Act so that the scandal of pension 
mis-selling - 600,000 pensions mis-sold and only 7,000 people compensated to 
date - will not happen again.
Too many people in work, particularly those on low and modest incomes and with 
changing patterns of employment, cannot join good-value second pension schemes. 
Labour will create a new framework - stakeholder pensions - to meet this need. 
We will encourage new partnerships between financial service companies, 
employers and employees to develop these pension schemes. They will be approved 
to receive people's savings only if they meet high standards of value for money, 
flexibility and security.
Labour will promote choice in pension provision. We will support and strengthen 
the framework for occupational pensions. Personal pensions, appropriately 
regulated, will remain a good option for many. Labour will retain SERPS as an 
option for those who wish to remain within it. We will also seek to develop the 
administrative structure of SERPS so as to create a 'citizenship pension' for 
those who assume responsibility as carers, as a result lose out on the pension 
entitlements they would otherwise acquire, and currently end up on means-tested 
benefits.
We overcame government opposition to pension splitting between women and men on 
divorce. We will implement this in government.
We aim to provide real security for families through a modern system of 
community care. As people grow older, their need for care increases. The 
Conservative approach is to promote private insurance and privatisation of care 
homes. But private insurance will be inaccessible to most people. And their 
policy for residential homes is dogmatic and will not work. We believe that 
local authorities should be free to develop a mix of public and private care.
We recognise the immense amount of care provision undertaken by family members, 
neighbours and friends. It was a Labour MP who piloted the 1995 Carers Act 
through Parliament. We will establish a Royal Commission to work out a fair 
system for funding long-term care for the elderly. We will introduce a 
'long-term care charter' defining the standard of services which people are 
entitled to expect from health, housing and social services. We are committed to 
an independent inspection and regulation service for residential homes, and 
domiciliary care.
Everyone is entitled to dignity in retirement. Under the Tories, the earnings 
link for state pensions has been ended, VAT on fuel has been imposed, SERPS has 
been undermined and community care is in tatters. We will set up a review of the 
central areas of insecurity for elderly people: all aspects of the basic pension 
and its value, second pensions including SERPS, and community care. The review 
will ensure that the views of pensioners are heard. Our watchword in developing 
policy for pensions and long-term care will be to build consensus among all 
interested parties. 
We will help you get more out of life
  Every government department a 'green' department 
  Efficient and clean transport for all 
  New arts and science talent fund for young people 
  Reform the lottery 
  Improve life in rural areas 
  Back World Cup bid 
The millennium is the time to reaffirm our responsibility to protect and enhance 
our environment so that the country we hand on to our children and our 
grandchildren is a better place in which to live. It also provides a natural 
opportunity to celebrate and improve the contribution made by the arts, culture 
and sport to our nation. We need a new and dynamic approach to the 'creative 
economy'. The Department of National Heritage will develop a strategic vision 
that matches the real power and energy of British arts, media and cultural 
industries. 
Protecting the environment
Our generation, and generations yet to come, are dependent on the integrity of 
the environment. No one can escape unhealthy water, polluted air or adverse 
climate change. And just as these problems affect us all, so we must act 
together to tackle them. No responsible government can afford to take risks with 
the future: the cost is too high. So it is our duty to act now.
The foundation of Labour's environmental approach is that protection of the 
environment cannot be the sole responsibility of any one department of state. 
All departments must promote policies to sustain the environment. And Parliament 
should have an environmental audit committee to ensure high standards across 
government.
Throughout this manifesto, there are policies designed to combine environmental 
sustainability with economic and social progress. They extend from commitments 
at local level to give communities enhanced control over their environments, to 
initiatives at international level to ensure that all countries are contributing 
to the protection of the environment.
A sustainable environment requires above all an effective and integrated 
transport policy at national, regional and local level that will provide genuine 
choice to meet people's transport needs. That is what we will establish and 
develop. 
Railways
The process of rail privatisation is now largely complete. It has made fortunes 
for a few, but has been a poor deal for the taxpayer. It has fragmented the 
network and now threatens services. Our task will be to improve the situation as 
we find it, not as we wish it to be. Our overriding goal must be to win more 
passengers and freight on to rail. The system must be run in the public interest 
with higher levels of investment and effective enforcement of train operators' 
service commitments. There must be convenient connections, through-ticketing and 
accurate travel information for the benefit of all passengers.
To achieve these aims, we will establish more effective and accountable 
regulation by the rail regulator; we will ensure that the public subsidy serves 
the public interest; and we will establish a new rail authority, combining 
functions currently carried out by the rail franchiser and the Department of 
Transport, to provide a clear, coherent and strategic programme for the 
development of the railways so that passenger expectations are met.
The Conservative plan for the wholesale privatisation of London Underground is 
not the answer. It would be a poor deal for the taxpayer and passenger alike. 
Yet again, public assets would be sold off at an under-valued rate. Much-needed 
investment would be delayed. The core public responsibilities of the Underground 
would be threatened.
Labour plans a new public/private partnership to improve the Underground, 
safeguard its commitment to the public interest and guarantee value for money to 
taxpayers and passengers. 
Road transport
A balanced transport system must cater for all the familiar modes of transport: 
cars - whether owned, leased or shared; taxis; buses; bicycles and motorcycles. 
All needs must be addressed in transport planning to ensure the best mix of all 
types of transport, offer quality public transport wherever possible and help to 
protect the environment.
The key to efficient bus services is proper regulation at local level, with 
partnerships between local councils and bus operators an essential component. 
There must be improved provision and enforcement of bus lanes. Better parking 
facilities for cars must be linked to convenient bus services to town centres.
Road safety is a high priority. Cycling and walking must be made safer, 
especially around schools.
We remain unpersuaded by the case for heavier, 44-tonne lorries mooted by the 
Conservatives. Our concern is that they would prove dangerous and damaging to 
the environment.
Our plans to reduce pollution include working with the automotive industry to 
develop 'smart', efficient and clean cars for the future, with substantially 
reduced emission levels. The review of vehicle excise duty to promote 
low-emission vehicles will be continued.
We will conduct an overall strategic review of the roads programme against the 
criteria of accessibility, safety, economy and environmental impact, using 
public/private partnerships to improve road maintenance and exploiting new 
technology to improve journey information. 
Shipping and aviation
The Tory years have seen the near-extinction of Britain's merchant fleet. Labour 
will work with all concerned in shipping and ports to help develop their 
economic potential to the full.
The guiding objectives of our aviation strategy will be fair competition, safety 
and environmental standards. We want all British carriers to be able to compete 
fairly in the interests of consumers. 
Life in our countryside
Labour recognises the special needs of people who live and work in rural areas. 
The Conservatives do not. Public services and transport services in rural areas 
must not be allowed to deteriorate. The Conservatives have tried to privatise 
the Post Office. We opposed that, in favour of a public Post Office providing a 
comprehensive service. Conservative plans would mean higher charges for letters 
and put rural post offices under threat.
We favour a moratorium on large-scale sales of Forestry Commission land. We 
recognise that the countryside is a great natural asset, a part of our heritage 
which calls for careful stewardship. This must be balanced, however, with the 
needs of people who live and work in rural areas.
The total failure of the Conservatives to manage the BSE crisis effectively and 
to secure any raising of the ban on British beef has wreaked havoc on the beef 
and dairy industries. The cost to the taxpayer so far is £3.5 billion.
Labour aims to reform the Common Agricultural Policy to save money, to support 
the rural economy and enhance the environment.
Our initiatives to link all schools to the information superhighway will ensure 
that children in rural areas have access to the best educational resources.
Our policies include greater freedom for people to explore our open countryside. 
We will not, however, permit any abuse of a right to greater access.
We will ensure greater protection for wildlife. We have advocated new measures 
to promote animal welfare, including a free vote in Parliament on whether 
hunting with hounds should be banned by legislation.
Angling is Britain's most popular sport. Labour's anglers' charter affirms our 
long-standing commitment to angling and to the objective of protecting the 
aquatic environment. 
Arts and culture
The arts, culture and sport are central to the task of recreating the sense of 
community, identity and civic pride that should define our country. Yet we 
consistently undervalue the role of the arts and culture in helping to create a 
civic society - from amateur theatre to our art galleries.
Art, sport and leisure are vital to our quality of life and the renewal of our 
economy. They are significant earners for Britain. They employ hundreds of 
thousands of people. They bring millions of tourists to Britain every year, who 
will also be helped by Labour's plans for new quality assurance in hotel 
accommodation.
We propose to set up a National Endowment for Science and the Arts to sponsor 
young talent. NESTA will be a national trust - for talent rather than buildings 
- for the 21st century. NESTA will be partly funded by the lottery; and artists 
who have gained high rewards from their excellence in the arts and wish to 
support young talent will be encouraged to donate copyright and royalties to 
NESTA. 
Sport
A Labour government will take the lead in extending opportunities for 
participation in sports; and in identifying sporting excellence and supporting 
it.
School sports must be the foundation. We will bring the government's policy of 
forcing schools to sell off playing fields to an end. We will provide full 
backing to the bid to host the 2006 football World Cup in England. A Labour 
government will also work to bring the Olympics and other major international 
sporting events to Britain. 
A people's lottery
The lottery has been a financial success. But there has been no overall strategy 
for the allocation of monies; and no co-ordination among the five distributor 
bodies about the projects deserving to benefit from lottery funding. For 
example, the multi-million-pound expenditure on the Churchill papers caused 
national outrage. A Labour government will review the distribution of lottery 
proceeds to ensure that there is the widest possible access to the benefits of 
lottery revenues throughout the UK.
Labour has already proposed a new millennium commission to commence after the 
closure of the Millennium Exhibition, to provide direct support for a range of 
education, environment and public health projects, including those directed at 
children's play, a project currently excluded from lottery benefit.
Because the lottery is a monopoly intended to serve the public interest, it must 
be administered efficiently and economically. When the current contract runs 
out, Labour will seek an efficient not-for-profit operator to ensure that the 
maximum sums go to good causes. 
Media and broadcasting
Labour aims for a thriving, diverse media industry, combining commercial success 
and public service. We will ensure that the BBC continues to be a flagship for 
British creativity and public service broadcasting, but we believe that the 
combination of public and private sectors in competition is a key spur to 
innovation and high standards. The regulatory framework for media and 
broadcasting should reflect the realities of a far more open and competitive 
economy, and enormous technological advance, for example with digital 
television. Labour will balance sensible rules, fair regulation and national and 
international competition, so maintaining quality and diversity for the benefit 
of viewers. 
Citizens' service for a new millennium
An independent and creative voluntary sector, committed to voluntary activity as 
an expression of citizenship, is central to our vision of a stakeholder society. 
We are committed to developing plans for a national citizens' service programme, 
to tap the enthusiasm and commitment of the many young people who want to make 
voluntary contributions in service of their communities. The millennium should 
harness the imagination of all those people who have so much to offer for the 
benefit of the community. We do not believe programmes should be imposed from 
the top down, but on the contrary wish to encourage a broad range of voluntary 
initiatives devised and developed by people within their own communities. 
We will clean up politics
  End the hereditary principle in the House of Lords 
  Reform of party funding to end sleaze 
  Devolved power in Scotland and Wales 
  Elected mayors for London and other cities 
  More independent but accountable local government 
  Freedom of information and guaranteed human rights 
The Conservatives seem opposed to the very idea of democracy. They support 
hereditary peers, unaccountable quangos and secretive government. They have 
debased democracy through their MPs who have taken cash for asking questions in 
the House of Commons. They are opposed to the development of decentralised 
government. The party which once opposed universal suffrage and votes for women 
now says our constitution is so perfect that it cannot be improved.
Our system of government is centralised, inefficient and bureaucratic. Our 
citizens cannot assert their basic rights in our own courts. The Conservatives 
are afflicted by sleaze and prosper from secret funds from foreign supporters. 
There is unquestionably a national crisis of confidence in our political system, 
to which Labour will respond in a measured and sensible way. 
A modern House of Lords
The House of Lords must be reformed. As an initial, self-contained reform, not 
dependent on further reform in the future, the right of hereditary peers to sit 
and vote in the House of Lords will be ended by statute. This will be the first 
stage in a process of reform to make the House of Lords more democratic and 
representative. The legislative powers of the House of Lords will remain 
unaltered.
The system of appointment of life peers to the House of Lords will be reviewed. 
Our objective will be to ensure that over time party appointees as life peers 
more accurately reflect the proportion of votes cast at the previous general 
election. We are committed to maintaining an independent cross-bench presence of 
life peers. No one political party should seek a majority in the House of Lords.
A committee of both Houses of Parliament will be appointed to undertake a 
wide-ranging review of possible further change and then to bring forward 
proposals for reform.
We have no plans to replace the monarchy. 
An effective House of Commons
We believe the House of Commons is in need of modernisation and we will ask the 
House to establish a special Select Committee to review its procedures. Prime 
Minister's Questions will be made more effective. Ministerial accountability 
will be reviewed so as to remove recent abuses. The process for scrutinising 
European legislation will be overhauled.
The Nolan recommendations will be fully implemented and extended to all public 
bodies. We will oblige parties to declare the source of all donations above a 
minimum figure: Labour does this voluntarily and all parties should do so. 
Foreign funding will be banned. We will ask the Nolan Committee to consider how 
the funding of political parties should be regulated and reformed.
We are committed to a referendum on the voting system for the House of Commons. 
An independent commission on voting systems will be appointed early to recommend 
a proportional alternative to the first-past-the-post system.
At this election, Labour is proud to be making major strides to rectify the 
under-representation of women in public life. 
Open government
Unnecessary secrecy in government leads to arrogance in government and defective 
policy decisions. The Scott Report on arms to Iraq revealed Conservative abuses 
of power. We are pledged to a Freedom of Information Act, leading to more open 
government, and an independent National Statistical Service. 
Devolution: strengthening the Union
The United Kingdom is a partnership enriched by distinct national identities and 
traditions. Scotland has its own systems of education, law and local government. 
Wales has its language and cultural traditions. We will meet the demand for 
decentralisation of power to Scotland and Wales, once established in 
referendums.
Subsidiarity is as sound a principle in Britain as it is in Europe. Our proposal 
is for devolution not federation. A sovereign Westminster Parliament will 
devolve power to Scotland and Wales. The Union will be strengthened and the 
threat of separatism removed.
As soon as possible after the election, we will enact legislation to allow the 
people of Scotland and Wales to vote in separate referendums on our proposals, 
which will be set out in white papers. These referendums will take place not 
later than the autumn of 1997. A simple majority of those voting in each 
referendum will be the majority required. Popular endorsement will strengthen 
the legitimacy of our proposals and speed their passage through Parliament.
For Scotland we propose the creation of a parliament with law-making powers, 
firmly based on the agreement reached in the Scottish Constitutional Convention, 
including defined and limited financial powers to vary revenue and elected by an 
additional member system. In the Scottish referendum we will seek separate 
endorsement of the proposal to create a parliament, and of the proposal to give 
it defined and limited financial powers to vary revenue. The Scottish parliament 
will extend democratic control over the responsibilities currently exercised 
administratively by the Scottish Office. The responsibilities of the UK 
Parliament will remain unchanged over UK policy, for example economic, defence 
and foreign policy.
The Welsh assembly will provide democratic control of the existing Welsh Office 
functions. It will have secondary legislative powers and will be specifically 
empowered to reform and democratise the quango state. It will be elected by an 
additional member system.
Following majorities in the referendums, we will introduce in the first year of 
the Parliament legislation on the substantive devolution proposals outlined in 
our white papers. 
Good local government
Local decision-making should be less constrained by central government, and also 
more accountable to local people. We will place on councils a new duty to 
promote the economic, social and environmental well-being of their area. They 
should work in partnership with local people, local business and local voluntary 
organisations. They will have the powers necessary to develop these 
partnerships. To ensure greater accountability, a proportion of councillors in 
each locality will be elected annually. We will encourage democratic innovations 
in local government, including pilots of the idea of elected mayors with 
executive powers in cities.
Although crude and universal council tax capping should go, we will retain 
reserve powers to control excessive council tax rises.
Local business concerns are critical to good local government. There are sound 
democratic reasons why, in principle, the business rate should be set locally, 
not nationally. But we will make no change to the present system for determining 
the business rate without full consultation with business.
The funnelling of government grant to Conservative-controlled Westminster speaks 
volumes about the unfairness of the current grant system. Labour is committed to 
a fair distribution of government grant. The basic framework, not every detail, 
of local service provision must be for central government. Councils should not 
be forced to put their services out to tender, but will be required to obtain 
best value. We reject the dogmatic view that services must be privatised to be 
of high quality, but equally we see no reason why a service should be delivered 
directly if other more efficient means are available. Cost counts but so does 
quality.
Every council will be required to publish a local performance plan with targets 
for service improvement, and be expected to achieve them. The Audit Commission 
will be given additional powers to monitor performance and promote efficiency. 
On its advice, government will where necessary send in a management team with 
full powers to remedy failure.
Labour councils have been at the forefront of environmental initiatives under 
Local Agenda 21, the international framework for local action arising from the 
1992 Earth Summit. A Labour government will encourage all local authorities to 
adopt plans to protect and enhance their local environment.
Local government is at the sharp end of the fight against deprivation. Ten years 
after the Conservatives promised to improve the inner cities, poverty and social 
division afflict towns and outer estates alike. A Labour government will join 
with local government in a concerted attack against the multiple causes of 
social and economic decline - unemployment, bad housing, crime, poor health and 
a degraded environment. 
London
London is the only Western capital without an elected city government. Following 
a referendum to confirm popular demand, there will be a new deal for London, 
with a strategic authority and a mayor, each directly elected. Both will speak 
up for the needs of the city and plan its future. They will not duplicate the 
work of the boroughs, but take responsibility for London-wide issues - economic 
regeneration, planning, policing, transport and environmental protection. 
London-wide responsibility for its own government is urgently required. We will 
make it happen. 
The regions of England
The Conservatives have created a tier of regional government in England through 
quangos and government regional offices. Meanwhile local authorities have come 
together to create a more co-ordinated regional voice. Labour will build on 
these developments through the establishment of regional chambers to co-ordinate 
transport, planning, economic development, bids for European funding and land 
use planning.
Demand for directly elected regional government so varies across England that it 
would be wrong to impose a uniform system. In time we will introduce legislation 
to allow the people, region by region, to decide in a referendum whether they 
want directly elected regional government. Only where clear popular consent is 
established will arrangements be made for elected regional assemblies. This 
would require a predominantly unitary system of local government, as presently 
exists in Scotland and Wales, and confirmation by independent auditors that no 
additional public expenditure overall would be involved. Our plans will not mean 
adding a new tier of government to the existing English system. 
Real rights for citizens
Citizens should have statutory rights to enforce their human rights in the UK 
courts. We will by statute incorporate the European Convention on Human Rights 
into UK law to bring these rights home and allow our people access to them in 
their national courts. The incorporation of the European Convention will 
establish a floor, not a ceiling, for human rights. Parliament will remain free 
to enhance these rights, for example by a Freedom of Information Act.
We will seek to end unjustifiable discrimination wherever it exists. For 
example, we support comprehensive, enforceable civil rights for disabled people 
against discrimination in society or at work, developed in partnership with all 
interested parties.
Labour will undertake a wide-ranging review both of the reform of the civil 
justice system and Legal Aid. We will achieve value for money for the taxpayer 
and the consumer. A community legal service will develop local, regional and 
national plans for the development of Legal Aid according to the needs and 
priorities of regions and areas. The key to success will be to promote a 
partnership between the voluntary sector, the legal profession and the Legal Aid 
Board.
Every country must have firm control over immigration and Britain is no 
exception. All applications, however, should be dealt with speedily and fairly. 
There are, rightly, criteria for those who want to enter this country to join 
husband or wife. We will ensure that these are properly enforced. We will, 
however, reform the system in current use to remove the arbitrary and unfair 
results that can follow from the existing 'primary purpose' rule. There will be 
a streamlined system of appeals for visitors denied a visa.
The system for dealing with asylum seekers is expensive and slow - there are 
many undecided cases dating back beyond 1993. We will ensure swift and fair 
decisions on whether someone can stay or go, control unscrupulous immigration 
advisors and crack down on the fraudulent use of birth certificates. 
Northern Ireland
Labour's approach to the peace process has been bipartisan. We have supported 
the recent agreements between the two governments - the Anglo-Irish Agreement, 
the Downing Street Declaration and the Framework Document. The government has 
tabled proposals which include a new devolved legislative body, as well as 
cross-border co-operation and continued dialogue between the two governments.
There will be as great a priority attached to seeing that process through with 
Labour as under the Conservatives, in co-operation with the Irish government and 
the Northern Ireland parties. We will expect the same bipartisan approach from a 
Conservative opposition.
We will take effective measures to combat the terrorist threat.
There is now general acceptance that the future of Northern Ireland must be 
determined by the consent of the people as set out in the Downing Street 
Declaration. Labour recognises that the option of a united Ireland does not 
command the consent of the Unionist tradition, nor does the existing status of 
Northern Ireland command the consent of the Nationalist tradition. We are 
therefore committed to reconciliation between the two traditions and to a new 
political settlement which can command the support of both. Labour will help 
build trust and confidence among both Nationalist and Unionist traditions in 
Northern Ireland by acting to guarantee human rights, strengthen confidence in 
policing, combat discrimination at work and reduce tensions over parades. Labour 
will also foster economic progress and competitiveness in Northern Ireland, so 
as to reduce unemployment. 
We will give Britain leadership in Europe
  Referendum on single currency 
  Lead reform of the EU 
  Retain Trident: strong defence through NATO 
  A reformed United Nations 
  Helping to tackle global poverty 
Britain, though an island nation with limited natural resources, has for 
centuries been a leader of nations. But under the Conservatives Britain's 
influence has waned.
With a new Labour government, Britain will be strong in defence; resolute in 
standing up for its own interests; an advocate of human rights and democracy the 
world over; a reliable and powerful ally in the international institutions of 
which we are a member; and will be a leader in Europe.
Our vision of Europe is of an alliance of independent nations choosing to 
co-operate to achieve the goals they cannot achieve alone. We oppose a European 
federal superstate.
There are only three options for Britain in Europe. The first is to come out. 
The second is to stay in, but on the sidelines. The third is to stay in, but in 
a leading role.
An increasing number of Conservatives, overtly or covertly, favour the first. 
But withdrawal would be disastrous for Britain. It would put millions of jobs at 
risk. It would dry up inward investment. It would destroy our clout in 
international trade negotiations. It would relegate Britain from the premier 
division of nations.
The second is exactly where we are today under the Conservatives. The BSE fiasco 
symbolises their failures in Europe.
The third is the path a new Labour government will take. A fresh start in 
Europe, with the credibility to achieve reform. We have set out a detailed 
agenda for reform, leading from the front during the UK presidency in the first 
half of 1998: 
  Rapid completion of the single market: a top priority for the British 
  presidency. We will open up markets to competition; pursue tough action 
  against unfair state aids; and ensure proper enforcement of single market 
  rules. This will strengthen Europe's competitiveness and open up new 
  opportunities for British firms. 
  High priority for enlargement of the European Union to include the countries 
  of central and eastern Europe and Cyprus, and the institutional reforms 
  necessary to make an enlarged Europe work more efficiently. 
  Urgent reform of the Common Agricultural Policy. It is costly, vulnerable to 
  fraud and not geared to environmental protection. Enlargement and the World 
  Trade talks in 1999 will make reform even more essential. We will seek a 
  thorough overhaul of the Common Fisheries Policy to conserve our fish stocks 
  in the long-term interests of the UK fishing industry. 
  Greater openness and democracy in EU institutions with open voting in the 
  Council of Ministers and more effective scrutiny of the Commission by the 
  European Parliament. We have long supported a proportional voting system for 
  election to the European Parliament. 
  Retention of the national veto over key matters of national interest, such as 
  taxation, defence and security, immigration, decisions over the budget and 
  treaty changes, while considering the extension of Qualified Majority Voting 
  in limited areas where that is in Britain's interests. 
  Britain to sign the Social Chapter. An 'empty chair' at the negotiating table 
  is disastrous for Britain. The Social Chapter is a framework under which 
  legislative measures can be agreed. Only two measures have been agreed - 
  consultation for employees of large Europe-wide companies and entitlement to 
  unpaid parental leave. Successful companies already work closely with their 
  workforces. The Social Chapter cannot be used to force the harmonisation of 
  social security or tax legislation and it does not cost jobs. We will use our 
  participation to promote employability and flexibility, not high social costs. 

The single currency
Any decision about Britain joining the single currency must be determined by a 
hard-headed assessment of Britain's economic interests. Only Labour can be 
trusted to do this: the Tories are riven by faction. But there are formidable 
obstacles in the way of Britain being in the first wave of membership, if EMU 
takes place on 1 January 1999. What is essential for the success of EMU is 
genuine convergence among the economies that take part, without any fudging of 
the rules. However, to exclude British membership of EMU forever would be to 
destroy any influence we have over a process which will affect us whether we are 
in or out. We must therefore play a full part in the debate to influence it in 
Britain's interests.
In any event, there are three pre-conditions which would have to be satisfied 
before Britain could join during the next Parliament: first, the Cabinet would 
have to agree; then Parliament; and finally the people would have to say 'Yes' 
in a referendum. 
Strong defence through NATO
The post-Cold War world faces a range of new security challenges - proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction, the growth of ethnic nationalism and extremism, 
international terrorism, and crime and drug trafficking. A new Labour government 
will build a strong defence against these threats. Our security will continue to 
be based on NATO.
Our armed forces are among the most effective in the world. The country takes 
pride in their professionalism and courage. We will ensure that they remain 
strong to defend Britain. But the security of Britain is best served in a secure 
world, so we should be willing to contribute to wider international peace and 
security both through the alliances to which we belong, in particular NATO and 
the Western European Union, and through other international organisations such 
as the UN and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
Labour will conduct a strategic defence and security review to reassess our 
essential security interests and defence needs. It will consider how the roles, 
missions and capabilities of our armed forces should be adjusted to meet the new 
strategic realities. The review we propose will be foreign policy led, first 
assessing our likely overseas commitments and interests and then establishing 
how our forces should be deployed to meet them. 
Arms control
A new Labour government will retain Trident. We will press for multilateral 
negotiations towards mutual, balanced and verifiable reductions in nuclear 
weapons. When satisfied with verified progress towards our goal of the global 
elimination of nuclear weapons, we will ensure that British nuclear weapons are 
included in multilateral negotiations.
Labour will work for the effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons 
Convention and for a strengthening of the Biological Weapons Convention. Labour 
will ban the import, export, transfer and manufacture of all forms of 
anti-personnel landmines. We will introduce an immediate moratorium on their 
use. Labour will not permit the sale of arms to regimes that might use them for 
internal repression or international aggression. We will increase the 
transparency and accountability of decisions on export licences for arms. And we 
will support an EU code of conduct governing arms sales.
We support a strong UK defence industry, which is a strategic part of our 
industrial base as well as our defence effort. We believe that part of its 
expertise can be extended to civilian use through a defence diversification 
agency. 
Leadership in the international community
A new Labour government will use Britain's permanent seat on the Security 
Council to press for substantial reform of the United Nations, including an 
early resolution of its funding crisis, and a more effective role in 
peacekeeping, conflict prevention, the protection of human rights and 
safeguarding the global environment.
The Commonwealth provides Britain with a unique network of contacts linked by 
history, language and legal systems. Labour is committed to giving renewed 
priority to the Commonwealth in our foreign relations. We will seize the 
opportunity to increase trade and economic co-operation and will also build 
alliances with our Commonwealth partners to promote reform at the UN and common 
action on the global environment. Britain has a real opportunity to provide 
leadership to the Commonwealth when we host the heads of government meeting in 
Britain at the end of 1997. 
Promoting economic and social development
Labour will also attach much higher priority to combating global poverty and 
underdevelopment. According to the World Bank, there are 1. 3 billion people in 
the world who live in absolute poverty, subsisting on less than US$1 a day, 
while 35,000 children die each day from readily preventable diseases.
Labour believes that we have a clear moral responsibility to help combat global 
poverty. In government we will strengthen and restructure the British aid 
programme and bring development issues back into the mainstream of government 
decision-making. A Cabinet minister will lead a new department of international 
development.
We will shift aid resources towards programmes that help the poorest people in 
the poorest countries. We reaffirm the UK's commitment to the 0.7 per cent UN 
aid target and in government Labour will start to reverse the decline in UK aid 
spending.
We will work for greater consistency between the aid, trade, agriculture and 
economic reform policies of the EU. We will use our leadership position in the 
EU to maintain and enhance the position of the poorest countries during the 
renegotiation of the Lomo Convention.
We will support further measures to reduce the debt burden borne by the world's 
poorest countries and to ensure that developing countries are given a fair deal 
in international trade. It is our aim to rejoin UNESCO. We will consider how 
this can be done most effectively and will ensure that the cost is met from 
savings elsewhere. 
Human rights
Labour wants Britain to be respected in the world for the integrity with which 
it conducts its foreign relations. We will make the protection and promotion of 
human rights a central part of our foreign policy. We will work for the creation 
of a permanent international criminal court to investigate genocide, war crimes 
and crimes against humanity. 
A new environmental internationalism
Labour believes that the threats to the global climate should push environmental 
concerns higher up the international agenda. A Labour government will strengthen 
co-operation in the European Union on environmental issues, including climate 
change and ozone depletion. We will lead the fight against global warming, 
through our target of a 20 per cent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by the 
year 2010.
Labour believes the international environment should be safeguarded in 
negotiations over international trade. We will also work for the successful 
negotiation of a new protocol on climate change to be completed in Japan in 
1997. 
Leadership, not isolation
There is a sharp division between those who believe the way to cope with global 
change is for nations to retreat into isolationism and protectionism, and those 
who believe in internationalism and engagement. Labour has traditionally been 
the party of internationalism. Britain cannot be strong at home if it is weak 
abroad. The tragedy of the Conservative years has been the squandering of 
Britain's assets and the loss of Britain's influence.
A new Labour government will use those assets to the full to restore Britain's 
pride and influence as a leading force for good in the world. With effective 
leadership and clear vision, Britain could once again be at the centre of 
international decision-making instead of at its margins. 



This manifesto contains the detail of our plans. We have promised only what we 
know we can deliver. Britain deserves better and the following five election 
pledges will be the first steps towards a better Britain. If you would like to 
help us build that better Britain, join us by calling 0990 300 900.
  cut class sizes to 30 or under for 5, 6 and 7 year-olds by using money from 
  the assisted places scheme 
  fast-track punishment for persistent young offenders by halving the time from 
  arrest to sentencing 
  cut NHS waiting lists by treating an extra 100,000 patients as a first step by 
  releasing £100 million saved from NHS red tape 
  get 250,000 under-25 year-olds off benefit and into work by using money from a 
  windfall levy on the privatised utilities 
  no rise in income tax rates, cut VAT on heating to 5 per cent and inflation 
  and interest rates as low as possible 



  

