Conservative Party Manifesto 1979
Conservative manifesto, 1979


Contents 
FOREWORD by The Rt. Hon. Margaret Thatcher 
1. OUR FIVE TASKS 
2. RESTORING THE BALANCE 
  The control of inflation 
  Better value for money 
  Trade union reform 
    1. Picketing 
    2. The closed shop 
    3. Wider participation 
  Too many strikes 
  Responsible pay bargaining 
3. A MORE PROSPEROUS COUNTRY 
  Cutting income tax 
  A property-owning democracy 
  Industry, commerce and jobs 
  Nationalisation 
  Fair trade 
  Small businesses 
  Energy 
  Agriculture 
  Fishing 
  Animal welfare 
4. THE RULE OF LAW 
  The fight against crime 
  Deterring the criminal 
  Immigration and race relations 
  The supremacy of Parliament 
  Northern Ireland 
5. HELPING THE FAMILY 
  Homes of our own 
  The sale of council houses 
  Reviving the private rented sector 
  Protecting the environment 
  Standards in education 
  Parents' rights and responsibilities 
  The arts 
  Health and welfare 
  Making sense of social security 
  The elderly and the disabled 
6. A STRONG BRITAIN IN A FREE WORLD 
  Improving our defences 
  The European Community 
  Africa and the Middle East 
  Rhodesia 
  Trade, aid and the Commonwealth 
7. A NEW BEGINNING 

Foreword 
FOR ME, THE HEART OF POLITICS is not political theory, it is people and how they 
want to live their lives. 
No one who has lived in this country during the last five years can fail to be 
aware of how the balance of our society has been increasingly tilted in favour 
of the State at the expense of individual freedom. 
This election may be the last chance we have to reverse that process, to restore 
the balance of power in favour of the people. It is therefore the most crucial 
election since the war. 
Together with the threat to freedom there has been a feeling of helplessness, 
that we are a once great nation that has somehow fallen behind and that it is 
too late now to turn things round. 
I don't accept that. 1 believe we not only can, we must. This manifesto points 
the way. 
It contains no magic formula or lavish promises. It is not a recipe for an easy 
or a perfect life. But it sets out a broad framework for the recovery of our 
country, based not on dogma, but On reason, on common sense, above all on the 
liberty of the people under the law. 
The things we have in common as a nation far outnumber those that set us apart. 
It is in that spirit that I commend to you this manifesto.
Margaret Thatcher 


I. Our five tasks 
THIS ELECTION is about the future of Britain - a great country which seems to 
have lost its way. It is a country rich in natural resources, in coal, oil, gas 
and fertile farmlands. It is rich, too, in human resources, with professional 
and managerial skills of the highest calibre, with great industries and firms 
whose workers can be the equal of any in the world We are the inheritors of a 
long tradition of parliamentary democracy and the rule of law. 
Yet today, this country is faced with its most serious problems since the Second 
World War. What has happened to our country, to the values we used to share, to 
the success and prosperity we once took for granted? 
During the industrial strife of last winter, confidence, self-respect, common 
sense, and even our sense of common humanity were shaken. At times this society 
seemed on the brink of disintegration. 
Some of the reasons for our difficulties today are complex and go back many 
years. Others are more simple and more recent. We do not lay all the blame on 
the Labour Party: but Labour have been in power for most of the last fifteen 
years and cannot escape the major responsibility. 
They have made things worse in three ways. First, by practising the politics of 
envy and by actively discouraging the creation of wealth, they have set one 
group against another in an often bitter struggle to gain a larger share of a 
weak economy. 
Second, by enlarging the role of the State and diminishing the role of the 
individual, they have crippled the enterprise and effort on which a prosperous 
country with improving social services depends. 
Third, by heaping privilege without responsibility on the trade unions, Labour 
have given a minority of extremists the power to abuse individual liberties and 
to thwart Britain's chances of success. One result is that the trade union 
movement, which sprang from a deep and genuine fellow-feeling for the 
brotherhood of man, is today more distrusted and feared than ever before. 
It is not just that Labour have governed Britain badly. They have reached a 
dead-end. The very nature of their Party now 
prevents them from governing successfully in a free society and mixed economy. 
Divided against themselves; devoid of any policies except those which have led 
to and would worsen our present troubles; bound inescapably by ties of history, 
political dogma and financial dependence to a single powerful interest group, 
Labour have demonstrated yet again that they cannot speak and dare not act for 
the nation as a whole. 
Our country's relative decline is not inevitable. We in the Conservative Party 
think we can reverse it, not because we think we have all the answers but 
because we think we have the one answer that matters most. We want to work with 
the grain of human nature, helping people to help themselves - and others. This 
is the way to restore that self-reliance and self-confidence which are the basis 
of personal responsibility and national success. 
Attempting to do too much, politicians have failed to do those things which 
should be done. This has damaged the country and the authority of government. We 
must concentrate on what should be the priorities for any government. They are 
set out in this manifesto. 
Those who look in these pages for lavish promises or detailed commitments on 
every subject will look in vain. We may be able to do more in the next five 
years than we indicate here. We believe we can. But the Conservative 
government's first job will be to rebuild our economy and reunite a divided and 
disillusioned people. 
Our five tasks are: 
(i) To restore the health of our economic and social life, by controlling 
inflation and striking a fair balance between the rights and duties of the trade 
union movement. 
(2) To restore incentives so that hard work pays, success is rewarded and 
genuine new jobs are created in an expanding economy. 
(3) To uphold Parliament and the rule of law. 
(4) To support family life, by helping people to become home-owners, raising the 
standards of their children's education, and concentrating welfare services on 
the effective support of the old, the sick, the disabled and those who are in 
real need. 
(5) To strengthen Britain's defences and work with our allies to protect our 
interests in an increasingly threatening world. 
This is the strategy of the next Conservative government. 
2. Restoring the balance 
SOUND MONEY and a fair balance between the rights and obligations of unions, 
management and the community in which they work are essential to economic 
recovery. They should provide the stable conditions in which pay bargaining can 
take place as responsibly in Britain as it does in other countries. 
THE CONTROL OF INFLATION 
Under Labour prices have risen faster than at any peacetime period in the three 
centuries in which records have been kept, and inflation is now accelerating 
again. The pound today is worth less than half its '974 value. On present form 
it would be halved in value yet again within eight years. Inflation on this 
scale has come near to destroying our political and social stability. 
To master inflation, proper monetary discipline is essential, with publicly 
stated targets for the rate of growth of the money supply. At the same time, a 
gradual reduction in the size of the Government's borrowing requirement is also 
vital. This Government's price controls have done nothing to prevent inflation, 
as is proved by the doubling of prices since they came to power. All the 
controls have achieved is a loss of jobs and a reduction in consumer choice. 
The State takes too much of the nation's income; its share must be steadily 
reduced. When it spends and borrows too much, taxes, interest rates, prices and 
unemployment rise so that in the long run there is less wealth with which to 
improve Our standard of living and our social services. 
BETTER VALUE FOR MONEY 
Any future government which sets out honestly to reduce inflation and taxation 
will have to make substantial economies, and there should be no doubt about our 
intention to do so. We do not pretend that every saving can be made without 
change or complaint; but if the Government does not economise the sacrifices 
required of ordinary people will be all the greater. 
Important savings can be made in several ways. We will scrap expensive Socialist 
programmes, such as the nationalisation of building land. We shall reduce 
government intervention in industry and particularly that of the National 
Enterprise Board, whose borrowing powers are planned to reach £4.5 billion. We 
shall ensure that selective assistance to industry is not wasted, as it was in 
the case of Labour's assistance to certain oil platform yards, on which over £20 
million of public money was spent but no orders received. 
The reduction of waste, bureaucracy and over-government will also yield 
substantial savings. For example, we shall look for economies in the cost (about 
£1.2 billion) of running our tax and social security systems. By comparison with 
private industry, local direct labour schemes waste an estimated £400 million a 
year. Other examples of waste abound, such as the plan to spend £50 million to 
build another town hall in Southwark. 
TRADE UNION REFORM 
Free trade unions can only flourish in a free society. A strong and responsible 
trade union movement could play a big part in our economic recovery. We cannot 
go on, year after year, tearing ourselves apart in increasingly bitter and 
calamitous industrial disputes. In bringing about economic recovery, we should 
all be on the same side. Government and public, management and unions, employers 
and employees, all have a common interest in raising productivity and profits, 
thus increasing investment and employment, and improving real living standards 
for everyone in a high-productivity, high-wage, low-tax economy. Yet at the 
moment we have the reverse an economy in which the Government has to hold wages 
down to try to make us competitive with other countries where higher real wages 
are paid for by higher output. 
The crippling industrial disruption which hit Britain last winter had several 
causes: years with no growth in production; rigid pay control; high marginal 
rates of taxation; and the extension of trade union power and privileges. 
Between 1974 and 1976, Labour enacted a 'militants' charter' of trade union 
legislation. It tilted the balance of power in bargaining throughout industry 
away from responsible management and towards unions, and sometimes towards 
unofficial groups of workers acting in defiance of their official union 
leadership. 
We propose three changes which must be made at once. Although the Government 
refused our offer of support to carry them through the House of Commons last 
January, our proposals command general assent inside and outside the trade union 
movement. 
I. PICKETING 
Workers involved in a dispute have a right to try peacefully to persuade others 
to support them by picketing, but we believe that right should be limited to 
those in dispute picketing at their own place of work. In the last few years 
some of the picketing we have witnessed has gone much too far. Violence, 
intimidation and obstruction cannot be tolerated. We shall ensure that the 
protection of the law is available to those not concerned in the dispute but who 
at present can suffer severely from secondary action (picketing, blacking and 
blockading). This means an immediate review of the existing law on immunities in 
the light of recent decisions, followed by such amendment as may be appropriate 
of the 1976 legislation in this field. We shall also make any further changes 
that are necessary so that a citizen's right to work and go about his or her 
lawful business free from intimidation or obstruction is guaranteed. 
2. THE CLOSED SHOP 
Labour's strengthening of the closed shop has made picketing a more 
objectionable weapon. In some disputes, pickets have threatened other workers 
with the withdrawal of their union cards if they refuse to co-operate. No union 
card can mean no job. So the law must be changed. People arbitrarily excluded or 
expelled from any union must be given the right of appeal to a court of law. 
Existing employees and those with personal conviction must be adequately 
protected, and if they lose their jobs as a result of a closed shop they must be 
entitled to ample compensation. 
In addition, all agreements for a closed shop must be drawn up in line with the 
best practice followed at present and only if an overwhelming majority of the 
workers involved vote for it by secret ballot. We shall therefore propose a 
statutory code under Section 6 of the 1975 Employment Protection Act. We will 
not permit a closed shop in the non-industrial civil service and will resist 
further moves towards it in the newspaper industry. We are also committed to an 
enquiry into the activities of the SLADE union, which have done so much to bring 
trade unionism into disrepute. 
3. WIDER PARTICIPATION 
Too often trade unions are dominated by a handful of extremists who do not 
reflect the common-sense views of most union members. 
Wider use of secret ballots for decision-making throughout the trade union 
movement should be given every encouragement. We will therefore provide public 
funds for postal ballots for union elections and other important issues. Every 
trade unionist should be free to record his decisions as every voter has done 
for a hundred years in parliamentary elections, without others watching and 
taking note. 
We welcome closer involvement of workers, whether trade unionists or not, in the 
decisions that affect them at their place of work. It would be wrong to impose 
by law a system of participation in every company. It would be equally wrong to 
use the pretext of encouraging genuine worker involvement in order simply to 
increase union power or facilitate union control of pension funds. 
TOO MANY STRIKES 
Further changes may be needed to encourage people to behave responsibly and keep 
the bargains they make at work. Many deficiencies of British industrial 
relations are without foreign parallel. Strikes are too often a weapon of first 
rather than last resort. One cause is the financial treatment of strikers and 
their families. In reviewing the position, therefore, we shall ensure that 
unions bear their fair share of the cost of supporting those of their members 
who are on strike. 
Labour claim that industrial relations in Britain cannot be improved by changing 
the law. We disagree. If the law can be used to confer privileges, it can and 
should also be used to establish obligations. We cannot allow a repetition of 
the behaviour that we saw outside too many of our factories and hospitals last 
winter. 
RESPONSIBLE PAY BARGAINING 
Labour's approach to industrial relations and their disastrous economic policies 
have made realistic and responsible pay bargaining almost impossible. After 
encouraging the 'social contract' chaos of 1974-5, they tried to impose 
responsibility by the prolonged and rigid control of incomes. This policy 
collapsed last winter as we warned that it would. The Labour government then 
came full circle with the announcement of yet another 'social contract' with the 
unions. For five years now, the road to ruin has been paved with such exchanges 
of promises between the Labour government and the unions. 
To restore responsible pay bargaining, we must all start by recognising that 
Britain is a low-paid country because we have steadily become less efficient, 
less productive, less reliable and less competitive. Under this Government, we 
have more than doubled our pay but actually produced less in manufacturing 
industry. It will do yet further harm to go on printing money to pay ourselves 
more without first earning more. That would lead to even higher prices, fewer 
jobs and falling living standards. 
The return to responsibility will not be easy. It requires that people keep more 
of what they earn; that effort and skill earn larger rewards; and that the State 
leaves more resources for industry. There should also be more open and informed 
discussion of the Government's economic objectives (as happens, for example, in 
Germany and other countries) so that there is wider understanding of the 
consequences of unrealistic bargaining and industrial action. 
Pay bargaining in the private sector should be left to the companies and workers 
concerned. At the end of the day, no one should or can protect them from the 
results of the agreements they make. 
Different considerations apply to some extent to the public sector, of whose 
seven million workers the Government directly employs only a minority. In the 
great public corporations, pay bargaining should be governed, as in private 
ones, by what each can afford. There can be no question of subsidising excessive 
pay deals. 
Pay bargaining in central and local government, and other services such as 
health and education, must take place within the limits of what the taxpayer and 
ratepayer can afford. It is conducted under a variety of arrangements, some of 
long standing, such as pay research. In consultation with the unions, we will 
reconcile these with the cash limits used to control public spending, and seek 
to conclude no-strike agreements in a few essential services. Bargaining must 
also be put on a sounder economic footing, so that public sector wage 
settlements take full account of supply and demand md diflerences between 
regions, manning levels, job security and pension arrangements. 
3. A more prosperous country 
LABOUR HAVE GONE to great lengths to try to conceal the damage they have done to 
the economy and to our prospects of economic expansion. Even in the depression 
of the 19305 the British economy progressed more than it has under this Labour 
government. Their favourite but totally false excuse is that their appalling 
record is all due to the oil crisis and the world-wide economic depression. Yet 
since the oil crisis, despite our coal, and gas and oil from the North Sea, 
prices and unemployment in Britain have risen by more than in almost any other 
major industrial country. And output has risen by less. With much poorer energy 
supplies than Britain, the others have nonetheless done much better because they 
have not had a Labour government or suffered from Labour's mistakes. 
To become more prosperous, Britain must become more productive and the British 
people must be given more incentive. 
CUTTING INCOME TAX 
We shall cut income tax at all levels to reward hard work, responsibility and 
success; tackle the poverty trap; encourage saving and the wider ownership of 
property; simplify taxes - like VAT; and reduce tax bureaucracy. 
It is especially important to cut the absurdly high marginal rates of tax both 
at the bottom and top of the income scale. It must pay a man or woman 
significantly more to be in, rather than out of; work. Raising tax thresholds 
will let the low-paid out of the tax net altogether, and unemployment and 
short-term sickness benefit must be brought into the computation of annual 
income. 
The top rate of income tax should be cut to the European average and the higher 
tax bands widened. To encourage saving we will reduce the burden of the 
investment income surcharge. This will greatly help those pensioners who pay 
this additional tax on the income from their life-time savings, and who suffer 
so badly by comparison with members of occupational or inflation-proofed pension 
schemes. 
Growing North Sea oil revenues and reductions in Labour s public spending plans 
Will not be enough to pay for the income tax cuts the country needs. We must 
therefore be prepared to switch to some extent from taxes on earnings to taxes 
on spending. Value Added Tax does not apply, and will not be extended, to 
necessities like food, fuel, housing and transport. Moreover the levels of State 
pensions and other benefits take price rises into account. 
Labour's extravagance and incompetence have once again imposed a heavy burden on 
ratepayers this year. But cutting income tax must take priority for the time 
being over abolition of the domestic rating system. 
A PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY 
Unlike Labour, we want more people to have the security and satisfaction of 
owning property Our proposals for encouraging home ownership are contained in 
Chapter 5. 
We reject Labour's plan for a Wealth Tax. We shall deal with the most damaging 
features of the Capital Transfer and Capital Gains Taxes, and propose a simpler 
and less oppressive system of capital taxation in the longer term. We will 
expand and build on existing schemes for encouraging employee share-ownership 
and our tax policies generally will provide incentive to save and build up 
capital. 
INDUSTRY, COMMERCE AND JOBS 
Lower taxes on earnings and savings will encourage economic growth. But on their 
own they will not be enough to secure it. 
Profits are the foundation of a free enterprise economy. In Britain profits are 
still dangerously low. Price controls can prevent them from reaching a level 
adequate for the investment we need. In order to ensure effective competition 
and fair pricing policies, we will review the working of the Monopolies 
Commission, the Office of Fair Trading and the Price Commission, with the 
legislation which governs their activities. 
Too much emphasis has been placed on attempts to preserve existing jobs. We need 
to concentrate more on the creation of conditions in which new, more modern, 
more secure, better paid jobs come into existence. This is the best way of 
helping the unemployed and those threatened with the loss of their jobs in the 
future. 
Government strategies and plans cannot produce revival, nor can subsidies. Where 
it is in the national interest to help a firm in difficulties, such help must be 
temporary and tapered. 
We all hope that those firms which are at present being helped by the taxpayer 
will soon be able to succeed by themselves; but success or failure lies in their 
own hands. 
Of course, government can help to ease industrial change in those regions 
dependent on older, declining industries. We do not propose sudden, sharp 
changes in the measures now in force. However, there is a strong case for 
relating government assistance to projects more closely to the number of jobs 
they create. 
NATIONALISATION 
The British people strongly oppose Labour's plans to nationalise yet more firms 
and industries such as building, banking, insurance, pharmaceuticals and road 
haulage. More nationalisation would further impoverish us and further undermine 
our freedom. We will offer to sell back to private ownership the recently 
nationalised aerospace and shipbuilding concerns, giving their employees the 
opportunity to purchase shares. 
We aim to sell shares in the National Freight Corporation to the general public 
in order to achieve substantial private investment in it. We will also relax the 
Traffic Commissioner licensing regulations to enable new bus and other services 
to develop-particularly in rural areas-and we will encourage new private 
operators. 
Even where Labour have not nationalised they interfere too much. We shall 
therefore amend the '975 Industry Act and restrict the powers of the National 
Enterprise Board solely to the administration of the Government's temporary 
shareholdings, to be sold off as circumstances permit. We want to see those 
industries that remain nationalised running more successfully and we will 
therefore interfere less with their management and set them a clearer financial 
discipline in which to work. 
High productivity is the key to the future of industries like British Rail, 
where improvements would benefit both the work-force and passengers who have 
faced unprecedented fare increases over the last five years. 
FAIR TRADE 
Just as we reject nationalisation, so we are opposed to the other Socialist 
panacea-import controls. They would restrict consumer choice, raise prices and 
invite damaging retaliation against British goods overseas. We will vigorously 
oppose all kinds of dumping and other unfair foreign trade practices that 
undermine jobs at home. 
We fully support the renegotiated Multi-fibre Arrangement for textiles and will 
insist that it is monitored effectively and speedily. We also believe in a 
revised 'safeguard' clause under GATT, to give us a better defence against 
sudden and massive surges of imports that destroy jobs. 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
The creation of new jobs depends to a great extent on the success of smaller 
businesses. They have been especially hard hit under Labour. Our cuts in direct 
and capital taxation, the simplification of VAT and our general economic and 
industrial relations policies are the key to their future. We shall make 
planning restraints less rigid; reduce the number of official forms and make 
them simpler; provide safeguards against unfair competition from direct labour; 
review the new 714 Certificate system for subcontractors and review with 
representatives of the self-employed their National Insurance and pension 
position. We shall amend laws such as the Employment Protection Act where they 
damage smaller businesses-and larger ones too-and actually prevent the creation 
of jobs. 
We shall also undertake a thorough review of the enforcement procedures of 
Customs and Excise and the Inland Revenue, and introduce an easier regime for 
small firms in respect of company law and the disclosure of their affairs. 
ENERGY 
The development of our energy resources provides a challenge for both our 
nationalised industries and the private sector. Nowhere has private enterprise 
been more successful in creating jobs and wealth for the nation than in bringing 
North Sea oil and gas ashore. These benefits will be short-lived unless we 
pursue a vigorous policy for energy saving. Labour's interference has 
discouraged investment and could cost Britain billions of pounds in lost 
revenue. We shall undertake a complete review of all the activities of the 
British National Oil Corporation as soon as we take office. We shall ensure that 
our oil tax and licensing policies encourage new production. 
We believe that a competitive and efficient coal industry has an important role 
in meeting energy demand, together with a proper contribution from nuclear 
power. All energy developments raise important environmental issues, and we 
shall ensure the fullest public participation in major new decisions. 
AGRICULTURE 
Our agricultural and food industries are as important and as efficient as any 
that we have. They make an immense contribution to our balance of payments; they 
provide jobs for millions of people and they sustain the economy of the 
countryside. Labour have seriously undermined the profitability of these 
industries, without protecting consumers against rising food prices which have 
more than doubled during their term of office. We must ensure that these 
industries have the means to keep abreast of those in other countries. 
We believe that radical changes in the operation of the Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP) are necessary. We would, in particular, aim to devalue the Green 
Pound within the normal lifetime of a Parliament to a point which would enable 
our producers to compete on level terms with those in the rest of the Community. 
We will insist on a freeze in CAP prices for products in structural surplus. 
This should be maintained until the surpluses are eliminated. We could not 
entertain discriminatory proposals such as those which the Commission recently 
put forward for milk production. 
The Uplands are an important part of our agriculture. Those who live and work 
there should enjoy a reasonable standard of life. 
FISHING 
The Government's failure to negotiate with our Community partners proper 
arrangements for fishing has left the industry in a state of uncertainty. The 
general adoption of 200-mile limits has fundamentally altered the situation 
which existed when the Treaty of Accession was negotiated. We would work for an 
agreement which recognised: first, that United Kingdom waters contained more 
fish than those of the rest of the Community countries put together; secondly, 
the loss of fishing opportunities experienced by our fishermen; thirdly, the 
rights of inshore fishermen; last, and perhaps most important of all, the need 
for effective measures to conserve fish stocks which would be policed by 
individual coastal states. In the absence of agreement, we would not hesitate to 
take the necessary measures on our own, but of course on a non-discriminatory 
basis. 
ANIMAL WELFARE 
The welfare of animals is an issue that concerns us all. There are problems in 
certain areas and we will act immediately where it is necessary. More 
specifically, we will give full support to the EEC proposals on the 
transportation of animals. We shall update the Brambell Report, the codes of 
welfare for farm animals, and the legislation on experiments on live animals. We 
shall also re-examine the rules and enforcement applying to the export of live 
animals and shall halt the export of cows and ewes recently calved and lambed. 
4. The rule of law 
THE MOST DISTURBING THREAT to our freedom and security is the growing disrespect 
for the rule of law. In government as in opposition, Labour have undermined it. 
Yet respect for the rule of law is the basis of a free and civilised life. We 
will restore it, re-establishing the supremacy of Parliament and giving the 
right priority to the fight against crime. 
THE FIGHT AGAINST CRIME 
The number of crimes in England and Wales is nearly half as much again as it was 
in 1973. The next Conservative government will spend more on fighting crime even 
while we economise elsewhere. 
Britain needs strong, efficient police forces with high morale. Improved pay and 
conditions will help Chief Constables to recruit up to necessary establishment 
levels. We will therefore implement in full the recommendations of the Edmund 
Davies Committee. The police need more time to detect crime. So we will ease the 
weight of traffic supervision duties and review cumbersome court procedures 
which waste police time. We will also review the traffic laws, including the 
totting-up procedure. 
DETERRING THE CRIMINAL 
Surer detection means surer deterrence. We also need better crime prevention 
measures and more flexible, more effective sentencing. For violent criminals and 
thugs really tough sentences are essential. But in other cases long prison terms 
are not always the best deterrent. So we want to see a wider variety of 
sentences available to the courts. We will therefore amend the 1961 Criminal 
Justice Act which limits prison sentences on young adult offenders, and revise 
the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 to give magistrates the power to make 
residential and secure care orders on juveniles. 
We need more compulsory attendance centres for hooligans at junior and senior 
levels. In certain detention centres we will experiment with a tougher regime as 
a short, sharp shock for young criminals. For certain types of offenders, we 
also support the greater use of community service orders, intermediate treatment 
and attendance centres. Unpaid fines and compensation orders are ineffective. 
Fines should be assessed to punish the offender within his means and then be 
backed by effective sanctions for non-payment. 
Many people advocate capital punishment for murder. This must remain a matter of 
conscience for Members of Parliament. But we will give the new House of Commons 
an early opportunity for a free vote on this issue. 
IMMIGRATION AND RACE RELATIONS 
The rights of all British citizens legally settled here are equal before the law 
whatever their race, colour or creed. And their opportunities ought to be equal 
too. The ethnic minorities have already made a valuable contribution to the life 
of our nation. But firm immigration control for the future is essential if we 
are to achieve good community relations. It will end persistent fears about 
levels of immigration and will remove from those settled, and in many cases born 
here, the label of 'immigrant'. 
(i) We shall introduce a new British Nationality Act to define entitlement to 
British citizenship and to the right of abode in this country. It will not 
adversely affect the right of anyone now permanently settled here. 
(ii) We shall end the practice of allowing permanent settlement for those who 
come here for a temporary stay. 
(iii) We shall limit entry of parents, grandparents and children over 18 to a 
small number of urgent compassionate cases. 
(iv) We shall end the concession introduced by the Labour government in 1974 to 
husbands and male fiancés. 
(v) We shall severely restrict the issue of work permits. 
(vi) We shall introduce a Register of those Commonwealth wives and children 
entitled to entry for settlement under the 1971 Immigration Act. 
(vii) We shall then introduce a quota system, covering everyone outside the 
European Community, to control all entry for settlement. 
(viii) We shall take firm action against illegal immigrants and overstayers and 
help those immigrants who genuinely wish to leave this country-but there can be 
no question of compulsory repatriation. 
We will encourage the improvement of language training in schools and factories 
and of training facilities for the young unemployed in the ethnic communities. 
But these measures will achieve little without the effective control of 
immigration. That is essential for racial harmony in Britain today. 
THE SUPREMACY OF PARLIAMENT 
In recent years, Parliament has been weakened in two ways. First, outside groups 
have been allowed to usurp some of its democratic functions. Last winter, the 
Government permitted strike committees and pickets to take on powers and 
responsibilities which should have been discharged by Parliament and the police. 
Second, the traditional role of our legislature has suffered badly from the 
growth of government over the last quarter of a century. 
We will see that Parliament and no other body stands at the centre of the 
nation's life and decisions, and we will seek to make it effective in its job of 
controlling the Executive. 
We sympathise with the approach of the all-party parliamentary committees which 
put forward proposals last year for improving the way the House of Commons 
legislates and scrutinises public spending and the work of government 
departments. We will give the new House of Commons an early chance of coming to 
a decision on these proposals. 
The public has rightly grown anxious about many constitutional matters in the 
last few years - partly because our opponents have proposed major constitutional 
changes for party political advantage. Now Labour want not merely to abolish the 
House of' Lords but to put nothing in its place. This would be a most dangerous 
step. A strong Second Chamber is necessary not only to revise legislation but 
also to guarantee our constitution and liberties. 
It is not only the future of the Second Chamber which is at issue. We are 
committed to discussions about the future government of Scotland, and have put 
forward proposals for improved parliamentary control of administration in Wales. 
There are other important matters, such as a possible Bill of Rights, the use of 
referendums, and the relationship between Members of the European Parliament and 
Westminster, which we shall wish to discuss with all parties. 
NORTHERN IRELAND 
We shall maintain the Union of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in accordance 
with the wish of the majority in the Province. Its future still depends on the 
defeat of terrorism and the restoration of law and order. We shall continue with 
the help of the courage, resolution and restraint of the Security Forces-to give 
it the highest priority. There will be no amnesty for convicted terrorists. 
In the absence of devolved government, we will seek to establish one or more 
elected regional councils with a wide range of powers over local services. We 
recognise that Northern Ireland's industry will continue to require government 
support. 
5. Helping the family 
HOMES OF OUR OWN 
To most people ownership means first and foremost a home of their own. 
Many find it difficult today to raise the deposit for a mortgage. Our tax cuts 
will help them. We shall encourage shared purchase schemes which will enable 
people to buy a house or fiat on mortgage, on the basis initially of a 
part-payment which they complete later when their incomes are high enough. We 
should like in time to improve on existing legislation with a realistic grants 
scheme to assist first-time buyers of cheaper homes. As it costs about three 
times as much to subsidise a new council house as it does to give tax relief to 
a home buyer, there could well be a substantial saving to the tax and ratepayer. 

The prospect of very high mortgage interest rates deters some people from buying 
their homes and the reality can cause acute difficulties to those who have done 
so. Mortgage rates have risen steeply because of the Government's financial 
mismanagement. Our plans for cutting government spending and borrowing will 
lower them. 
THE SALE OF COUNCIL HOUSES 
Many families who live on council estates and in new towns would like to buy 
their own homes but either cannot afford to or are prevented by the local 
authority or the Labour government. The time has come to end these restrictions. 
In the first session of the next Parliament we shall therefore give council and 
new town tenants the legal right to buy their homes, while recognising the 
special circumstances of rural areas and sheltered housing for the elderly. 
Subject to safeguards over resale, the terms we propose would allow a discount 
on market values reflecting the fact that council tenants effectively have 
security of tenure. Our discounts will range from 33 per cent after three years, 
rising with length of tenancy to a maximum of 50 per cent after twenty years. We 
shall also ensure that 100 per cent mortgages are available for the purchase of 
council and new town houses. We shall introduce a right for these tenants to 
obtain limited term options on their homes so that they know in advance the 
price at which they can buy, while they save the money to do so. 
As far as possible, we will extend these rights to housing association tenants. 
At the very least, we shall give these associations the power to sell to their 
tenants. 
Those council house tenants who do not wish to buy their homes will be given new 
rights and responsibilities under our Tenants' Charter. 
REVIVING THE PRIVATE RENTED SECTOR 
As well as giving new impetus to the movement towards home ownership, we must 
make better use of our existing stock of houses. Between 1973 and 1977 no fewer 
than 400,000 dwellings were withdrawn from private rental. There are now 
hundreds of thousands of empty properties in Britain which are not let because 
the owners are deterred by legislation. We intend to introduce a new system of 
shorthold tenure which will allow short fixed-term lettings of these properties 
free of the most discouraging conditions of the present law. This provision will 
not, of course, affect the position of existing tenants. There should also be 
more flexible arrangements covering accommodation for students. At the same 
time, we must try to achieve a greater take-up in rent allowances for poorer 
tenants. 
PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT 
The quality of our environment is a vital concern to all of us. The last 
Conservative government had a proud record of achievement in reducing pollution, 
and protecting our heritage and countryside. We shall continue to give these 
issues a proper priority. Subject to the availability of resources we shall pay 
particular attention to the improvement and restoration of derelict land, the 
disposal and recycling of dangerous and other wastes, and reducing pollution of 
our rivers and canals. 
We attach particular importance to measures to reduce fuel consumption by 
improving insulation. 
STANDARDS IN EDUCATION 
The Labour Party is still obsessed with the structure of the schools system, 
paying too little regard to the quality of education. As a result we have a 
system which in the view of many of our parents and teachers all too often fails 
- at a cost of over £8 billion a year 
- even to provide pupils with the means of communication and understanding. We 
must restore to every child, regardless of background, the chance to progress as 
far as his or her abilities allow. 
We will halt the Labour government's policies which have led to the destruction 
of good schools; keep those of proven worth; and repeal those sections of the 
1976 Education Act which compel local authorities to reorganise along 
comprehensive lines and restrict their freedom to take up places at independent 
schools. 
We shall promote higher standards of achievement in basic skills. The 
Government's Assessment of Performance Unit will set national standards in 
reading, writing and arithmetic, monitored by tests worked out with teachers and 
others and applied locally by education authorities. The Inspectorate will be 
strengthened. In teacher training there must be more emphasis on practical 
skills and on maintaining discipline. 
Much of our higher education in Britain has a world-wide reputation for its 
quality. We shall seek to ensure that this excellence is maintained. We are 
aware of the special problems associated with the need to increase the number of 
high-quality entrants to the engineering professions. We shall review the 
relationship between school, further education and training to see how better 
use can be made of existing resources. 
We recognise the valuable work done by the Youth Service and will continue to 
give help to those voluntary bodies which make such a considerable contribution 
in this field. 
PARENTS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Extending parents' rights and responsibilities, including their right of choice, 
will also help raise standards by giving them greater influence over education. 
Our Parents' Charter will place a clear duty on government and local authorities 
to take account of parents' wishes when allocating children to schools, with a 
local appeals system for those dissatisfied. Schools will be required to publish 
prospectuses giving details of their examination and other results. 
The Direct Grant schools, abolished by Labour, gave wider opportunities for 
bright children from modest backgrounds. The Direct Grant principle will 
therefore be restored with an Assisted Places Scheme. Less well-off parents will 
be able to claim part or all of the fees at certain schools from a special 
government fund. 
THE ARTS 
Economic failure and Socialist policies have placed the arts under threat. 
Lightening the burden of tax should in time enable the private sponsor to 
flourish again and the reform of capital taxation will lessen the threat to our 
heritage. We will strengthen the existing provision whereby relief from CTT is 
available on assets placed in a maintenance fund for the support of heritage 
property. We favour the establishment of a National Heritage Fund to help 
preserve historic buildings and artistic treasures for the nation. We will 
continue to give as generous support to Britain's cultural and artistic life as 
the country can afford. 
Sport and recreation have also been hit by inflation and high taxation. We will 
continue to support the Sports Councils in the encouragement of recreation and 
international sporting achievement. 
HEALTH AND WELFARE 
The welfare of the old, the sick, the handicapped and the deprived has also 
suffered under Labour. The lack of money to improve our social services and 
assist those in need can only be overcome by restoring the nation's prosperity. 
But some improvements can be made now by spending what we do have more sensibly. 

In our National Health Service standards are falling; there is a crisis of 
morale; too often patients' needs do not come first. It is not our intention to 
reduce spending on the Health Service indeed, we intend to make better use of 
what resources are available. So we will simplify and decentralise the service 
and cut back bureaucracy. 
When resources are so tightly stretched it is folly to turn good money away from 
the NHS and to discourage people from doing more for themselves. We shall 
therefore allow pay-beds to be provided where there is a demand for them; end 
Labour's vendetta against the private health sector; and restore tax relief on 
employer-employee medical insurance schemes. The Royal Commission on the Health 
Service is studying the financing of health care, and any examination of 
possible longer term changes - for example greater reliance for NHS funding on 
the insurance pnnciple - must await their report. 
In the community, we must do more to help people to help themselves, and 
families to look after their own. We must also encourage the voluntary movement 
and self-help groups working in partnership with the statutory services. 
MAKING SENSE OF SOCIAL SECURITY 
Our social security system is now so complicated that even some Ministry 
officials do not understand it. Income tax starts at such a low level that many 
poor people are being taxed to pay for their own benefits. All too often they 
are little or no better off at work than they are on social security. 
This was one of our principal reasons for proposing a tax credit scheme. Child 
benefits are a step in the right direction. Further progress will be very 
difficult in the next few years, both for reasons of cost and because of 
technical problems involved in the switch to computers. We shall wish to move 
towards the fulfilment of our original tax credit objectives as and when 
resources become available. Meanwhile we shall do all we can to find other ways 
to simplify the system, restore the incentive to work, reduce the poverty trap 
and bring more effective help to those in greatest need. 
Restoring the will to work means, above all, cutting income tax. It also 
involves bringing unemployment and short-term sickness benefit within the tax 
system an objective fully shared by Labour Ministers. The rules about the 
unemployed accepting available jobs will be reinforced and we shall act more 
vigorously against fraud and abuse. 
We welcomed the new Child Benefit as the first stage of our tax credit scheme. 
One-parent families face much hardship so we will maintain the special addition 
for them. 
THE ELDERLY AND THE DISABLED 
We will honour the increases in retirement pensions which were promised just 
before the election. 
However, like others, pensioners have suffered from the high taxes and 
catastrophic inflation of Labour's years. 
It is wrong to discourage people who wish to work after retirement age, and we 
will phase out the 'earnings rule' during the next Parliament. The Christmas 
Bonus, which the last Conservative government started in 1972, will continue. We 
will exempt war widows' pensions from tax and provide a pension for pre-1950 
widows of 'other ranks' who do not receive one at present. 
Much has been done in recent years to help the disabled, but there is still a 
long way to go. Our aim is to provide a coherent system of cash benefits to meet 
the costs of disability, so that more disabled people can support themselves and 
live normal lives. We shall work towards this as swiftly as the strength of the 
economy allows. 
6. A strong Britain in a free world 
IMPROVING OUR DEFENCES 
During the past five years the military threat to the West has grown steadily as 
the Communist bloc has established virtual parity in strategic nuclear weapons 
and a substantial superiority in conventional weapons. Yet Labour have cut down 
our forces, weakened our defences and reduced our contribution to NATO. And the 
Left are pressing for still more reductions. 
We shall only be able to decide on the proper level of defence spending after 
consultation in government with the Chiefs of Staff and our allies. But it is 
already obvious that significant increases will be necessary. The SALT 
discussions increase the importance of ensuring the continuing effectiveness of 
Britain's nuclear deterrent. 
In recent times our armed forces have had to deal with a wide variety of 
national emergencies. They have responded magnificently despite government 
neglect and a severe shortage of manpower and equipment. We will give our 
servicemen decent living conditions, bring their pay up to full comparability 
with their civilian counterparts immediately and keep it there. In addition, we 
must maintain the efficiency of our reserve forces. We will improve their 
equipment, too, and hope to increase their strength. 
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY 
If we wish to play our full part in shaping world events over the next few 
critical years, we must also work honestly and genuinely with our partners in 
the European Community. There is much that we can achieve together, much more 
than we can achieve alone. 
There are some Community policies which need to be changed since they do not 
suit Britain's - or Europe's - best interests. But it is wrong to argue, as 
Labour do, that Europe has failed us. What has happened is that under Labour our 
country has been prevented from taking advantage of the opportunities which 
membership offers. 
Labour's economic policies have blunted our competitive edge and made it more 
difficult for our companies to sell in our partners' markets. What is more, the 
frequently obstructive and malevolent attitude of Labour Ministers has weakened 
the Community as a whole and Britain's bargaining power within it. 
By forfeiting the trust of our partners, Labour have made it much more difficult 
to persuade them to agree to the changes that are necessary in such important 
areas as the Common Agricultural Policy, the Community budget, and the proposed 
Common Fisheries Policy. 
The next Conservative government will restore Britain's influence by convincing 
our partners of our commitment to the Community's success. This will enable us 
to protect British interests and to play a leading and constructive role in the 
Community's efforts to tackle the many problems which it faces. 
We shall work for a common-sense Community which resists excessive bureaucracy 
and unnecessary harmonisation proposals, holding to the principles of free 
enterprise which inspired its original founders. 
Our policies for the reform of the CAP (see Chapter 3) would reduce the burden 
which the Community budget places upon the British taxpayer. We shall also 
strive to cut out waste in other Community spending programmes. 
National payments into the budget should be more closely related to ability to 
pay. Spending from the budget should be concentrated more strictly on policies 
and projects on which it makes sense for the Community rather than nation states 
to take the lead. 
We attach particular importance to the co-ordination of Member States' foreign 
policies. In a world dominated by the super-powers, Britain and her partners are 
best able to protect their international interests and to contribute to world 
peace and stability when they speak with a single voice. 
AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST 
In Africa and the Middle East, there is an increasing threat from the Soviet 
Union and its Cuban allies. That threat must be countered, not only through 
collaboration with our European and American allies but also by the people and 
governments in Africa and the Middle East whose independence is threatened. 
We shall do all we can to build on the Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty, to seek a 
comprehensive settlement which will bring peace to the whole region. 
RHODESIA 
The Conservative Party will aim to achieve a lasting settlement to the Rhodesia 
problem based on the democratic wishes of the people of that country. If the Six 
Principles, which all British governments have supported for the last fifteen 
years, are fully satisfied following the present Rhodesian Election, the next 
government will have the duty to return Rhodesia to a state of legality, move to 
lift sanctions, and do its utmost to ensure that the new independent state gains 
international recognition. 
TRADE, AID AND THE COMMONWEALTH 
Like other industrial countries, Britain has a vital interest in bringing 
prosperity to poorer nations which provide us with a growing market and supply 
many of the raw materials upon which we depend. The next Conservative government 
will help them through national and international programmes of aid and 
technical co-operation and by the encouragement of voluntary work. But we also 
attach particular importance to the development of trade and private investment 
through such instruments as the European Community's Lomé Convention. In 
particular, we will foster all our Commonwealth links and seek to harness to 
greater cifret the collective influence of the Commonwealth in world affairs. 
7. A new beginning 
IN THIS MANIFESTO we have not sought to understate the difficulties which face 
us-the economic and social problems at home, the threats to the freedom of the 
West abroad. Yet success and security are attainable if we have the courage and 
confidence to seize the opportunities which are open to us. 
We make no lavish promises. The repeated disappointment of rising expectations 
has led to a marked loss of faith in politicians' promises. Too much has gone 
wrong in Britain for us to hope to put it all right in a year or so. Many things 
will simply have to wait until the economy has been revived and we are once 
again creating the wealth on which so much else depends. 
Most people, in their hearts, know that Britain has to come to terms with 
reality. They no longer have any time for politicians who try to gloss over the 
harsh facts of life. Most people want to be told the truth, and to be given a 
clear lead towards the action needed for recovery. 
The years of make-believe and false optimism are over. It is time for a new 
beginning. 

British Conservative Party election manifesto, 1983CONSERVATIVE PARTY: 1983 
FOREWORD - THE CHALLENGE OF OUR TIMES
In the last four years, Britain has recovered her confidence and self-respect. 
We have regained the regard and admiration of other nations. We are seen today 
as a people with integrity, resolve and the will to succeed. 
This Manifesto describes the achievements of four years of Conservative 
government and sets out our plans for our second term. 
The choice before the nation is stark: either to continue our present steadfast 
progress towards recovery, or to follow policies more extreme and more damaging 
than those ever put forward by any previous Opposition. 
We face three challenges: the defence of our country, the employment of our 
people, and the prosperity of our economy. 
How to defend Britain's traditional liberties and distinctive way of life is the 
most vital decision that faces the people at this election. 
We have enjoyed peace and security for thirty-eight years - peace with freedom 
and justice. We dare not put that security at risk. 
Every thinking man and woman wants to get rid of nuclear weapons. To do that we 
must negotiate patiently from a position of strength, not abandon ours in 
advance. 
The universal problem of our time, and the most intractable, is unemployment. 
The answer is not bogus social contracts and government overspending. Both, in 
the end, destroy jobs. The only way to a lasting reduction in unemployment is to 
make the right products at the right prices, supported by good services. The 
Government's role is to keep inflation down and offer real incentives for 
enterprise. As we win back customers, so we win back jobs. 
We have a duty to protect the most vulnerable members of our society, many of 
whom contributed to the heritage we now enjoy. We are proud of the way we have 
shielded the pensioner and the National Health Service from the recession. 
Only if we create wealth can we continue to do justice to the old and the sick 
and the disabled. It is economic success which will provide the surest guarantee 
of help for those who need it most. 
Our history is the story of a free people - a great chain of people stretching 
back into the past and forward into the future. 
All are linked by a common belief in freedom, and in Britain's greatness. All 
are aware of their own responsibility to contribute to both. 
Our past is witness to their enduring courage, honesty and flair, and to their 
ability to change and create. Our future will be shaped by those same qualities. 

The task we face is formidable. Together, we have achieved much over the past 
four years. I believe it is now right to ask for a new mandate to meet the 
challenge of our times. 
MARGARET THATCHER 



THE ROAD TO RECOVERY
Britain is once more a force to be reckoned with. Formidable difficulties remain 
to be overcome. But after four years of Conservative government, national 
recovery has begun. 
When we came to office in May 1979, our country was suffering both from an 
economic crisis and a crisis of morale. British industry was uncompetitive, 
over-taxed, over-regulated and over-manned. The British economy was plagued by 
inflation. After only a brief artificial pause, it was back into double figures. 
This country was drifting further and further behind its neighbours. Defeatism 
was in the air. 
We did not disguise the fact that putting Britain right would be an extremely 
difficult task. The second sharp oil price increase and the deepest world 
recession since the 1 930s have made those difficulties worse. At the same time, 
the Western world is passing through another transformation from the age of the 
smokestack to the era of the microchip. Traditional industries are being 
transformed by the new technologies. These changes have led to a rapid rise in 
unemployment in almost every Western country. 
Our opponents claim that they could abolish unemployment by printing or 
borrowing thousands of millions of pounds. This is a cruel deceit. Their plans 
would immediately unleash a far more savage economic crisis than their last; a 
crisis which would, very soon, bring more unemployment in its wake. 
The truth is that unemployment, in Britain as in other countries, can be checked 
and then reduced only by steadily and patiently rebuilding the economy so that 
it produces the goods and services which people want to buy, at prices they can 
afford. 
What We Have Achieved 
This is the task to which we have steadfastly applied ourselves with gradually 
increasing success. Prices are rising more slowly now than at any time for 
fifteen years. Britain is now among the low-inflation nations of the Western 
world. Output is rising. 
We are creating the conditions in which trade and industry can prosper. We have 
swept away controls on wages, prices, dividends, foreign exchange, hire 
purchase, and office and factory building. 
We have returned to free enterprise many state firms, in order to provide better 
service to the customer and save taxpayers' money. 
We have cut income tax rates and raised allowances at all levels. 
We have more than protected pensions against rising prices. We have strengthened 
the National Health Service. We have given council tenants the right to buy 
their own homes. 
We have strengthened the police and the armed forces of the Crown. 
We have done all this and more, and still kept our promise to bring public 
spending under control. 
We have paid off nearly half the overseas debts the Labour Party left behind. 
Once the IMF's biggest borrower, we are now playing a leading part in 
strengthening international trade and finance - to the benefit of the poorest 
countries on earth. 
And we have acted so that people might live in freedom and justice. The bravery, 
skill and determination with which Britain's task force recaptured the Falklands 
reverberated around the world. Many small nations gave thanks for that stand; 
and our allies in the North Atlantic are heartened by what Britain achieved in 
the South Atlantic. 
Over the past four years, this country has recaptured much of her old pride. We 
now have five great tasks for the future. They are: 
  to create an economy which provides stable prices, lasting prosperity and 
  employment for our people; 
  to build a responsible society which protects the weak but also allows the 
  family and the individual to flourish; 
  to uphold Parliamentary democracy and strengthen the rule of law; 
  to improve the quality of life in our cities and countryside; 
  to defend Britain's freedom, to keep faith with our allies in Europe and in 
  NATO, and to keep the peace with justice. 
These tasks will require sustained determination, imagination and effort from 
Government and people alike. 
JOBS, PRICES AND UNIONS
During the years of recession, now coming to an end, even the most successful of 
our competitors have faced increasingly serious problems and mounting 
unemployment. Despite all these difficulties, the Conservative Government has 
been overcoming Britain's fundamental problems: restoring sound money, setting a 
better balance between trade unions and the rest of society, bringing efficiency 
to the nationalised industries, and developing effective policies to mitigate 
the curse of unemployment. 
The foundations of recovery have been firmly laid. In the next Parliament, we 
shall build on this progress. 
Success Against Inflation 
Steadier prices and honest money are essential conditions for recovery. Under 
the last Labour government, prices doubled and inflation soared to an all-time 
peak - despite the existence of a battery of controls on prices, profits, 
dividends and pay. 
Today, there are no such controls. Yet prices are rising more slowly than at any 
time since the 1 960s. During the last year, inflation has come down faster in 
Britain than in any other major economy. With lower inflation, businessmen, 
families, savers and pensioners can now begin at last to plan and budget ahead 
with confidence. 
In the next Parliament, we shall endeavour to bring inflation lower still. Our 
ultimate goal should be a society with stable prices. 
We shall maintain firm control of public spending and borrowing. If Government 
borrows too much, interest rates rise, and so do mortgage payments. Less 
spending by Government leaves more room to reduce taxes on families and 
businesses. 
We shall continue to set out a responsible financial strategy which will 
gradually reduce the growth of money in circulation - and so go on bringing 
inflation down. 
Our opponents are once again proposing the same financial policies that led to 
such appalling inflation and chaos in the past. 
Labour's 'National Economic Assessment' is a stale repeat of the Social Contract 
which ended so disastrously in the Winter of Discontent. Once again, the Labour 
Party is committed to carry out trade union leaders' instructions in exchange 
for mere expressions of goodwill. 
Commonsense in Pay Bargaining 
With lower inflation. we have seen a return to commonsense in pay bargaining. 
Uncertainty and anxiety about rising prices have contributed to the absurdly 
high pay claims that destroyed so many jobs. As inflation subsides, people in 
work can see the prospect of real, properly-earned improvements in their living 
standards - which have gone up by more than 5 per cent on average over the last 
four years. So long as sensible government policies are matched by sensible 
attitudes in industry and commerce, these living standards can continue to 
improve. 
The last four years have shown that a bureaucratic machine for controlling wages 
and prices is quite unnecessary. It simply stores up trouble and breeds 
inefficiency. 
But Government remains inescapably responsible for controlling its own costs. We 
are committed to fair and reasonable levels of pay for those who work in the 
public services. We shall therefore continue to seek sensible arrangements for 
determining pay in the Civil Service and the National Health Service, following 
the Megaw Report and the resolution of the NHS pay dispute. 
It is equally our duty to the nation as a whole to prevent any abuse of monopoly 
power or exploitation of the sick, the weak and the elderly. So we must continue 
to resist unreasonable pay claims in the public sector. 
Trade Union Reforms 
In the return to more sensible pay bargaining, the trade unions have an 
important part to play. 
They can be powerful instruments for good or harm, to promote progress or hinder 
change, to create new jobs or to destroy existing ones. All of us have a vital 
interest in ensuring that this power is used democratically and responsibly. 
Both trade union members and the general public have welcomed the 1980 and 1982 
Employment Acts, which restrain secondary picketing, encourage secret ballots, 
curtail abuse of the closed shop, and restore rights of redress against trade 
unions responsible for committing unlawful acts. 
But some trade union leaders still abuse their power against the wishes of their 
members and the interests of society. Our 1982 Green Paper, Democracy in Trade 
Unions, points the way to give union members control over their own unions. We 
shall given union members the right to: 
  hold ballots for the election of governing bodies of trade unions; 
  decide periodically whether their unions should have party political funds. 
We shall also curb the legal immunity of unions to call strikes without the 
prior approval of those concerned through a fair and secret ballot. 
Political Levy 
Consultations on the Green Paper have confirmed that there is widespread 
disquiet about how the right of individual trade union members not to pay the 
political levy operates in practice, through the system of contracting-out. We 
intend to invite the TUC to discuss the steps which the trade unions themselves 
can take to ensure that individual members are freely and effectively able to 
decide for themselves whether or not to pay the political levy. In the event 
that the trade unions are not willing to take such steps, the Government will be 
prepared to introduce measures to guarantee the free and effective right of 
choice. 
Essential Services 
The proposal to curb immunity in the absence of pre-strike ballots will reduce 
the risk of strikes in essential services. In addition, we shall consult further 
about the need for industrial relations in specified essential services to be 
governed by adequate procedure agreements, breach of which would deprive 
industrial action of immunity. The nation is entitled to expect that the 
operation of essential services should not be disrupted. 
Involving Employees 
Good employers involve their employees by consulting them and keeping them fully 
informed. This is vital for efficiency as well as harmony in industry. We shall 
continue to encourage it. Many employers have already done much in recent years 
to establish a long-needed sense of common purpose with their workforces. We 
shall resist current attempts to impose rigid systems of employer/employee 
relations in Britain. We will continue to encourage workers to identify with the 
success of the firm for which they work, by the promotion of share-ownership and 
profit-sharing. 
In each of the last two years, largely as a result of tax changes we have 
introduced, about a quarter of a million employees have acquired shares in the 
companies that employ them. 
When state industries are offered to the private sector, we have given their 
employees the chance to buy shares in them, and many have exercised this right. 
Unemployment: Coping with Change 
During the last four years, unemployment in the industrialised countries has 
risen more sharply than at any time since the 1 930s. Britain has been no 
exception. We have long been one of the least efficient and most over-manned of 
industrialised nations. We raised our own pay far more, and our output far less, 
than most of our competitors. Inevitably, this pushed prices up and drove 
countless customers to buy from other countries, forcing thousands of employers 
out of business and hundreds of thousands of workers out of jobs. 
At the same time, there has been a rapid shift of jobs from the old industries 
to the new, concentrated on services and the new technologies. Tragically, trade 
unions have often obstructed these changes. All too often this has delayed and 
reduced the new and better-paid jobs which could replace those that have been 
lost. 
This Government has an impressive record in helping the unemployed who, usually 
through no fault of their own, are paying the price of these past errors. 
We have committed over £2,000m. this year to training and special measures for 
the unemployed. This is supported by substantial help from the European 
Community's Social Fund, amounting to over £250m. in 1982. As long as 
unemployment remains high, we shall maintain special measures of this kind, 
which bring effective help to many of those who have no job. 
This year, some 1,100,000 people are being trained or helped by the most 
comprehensive programme of its kind in Europe. 
For the first time, the new Enterprise Allowance Scheme offers many thousands of 
unemployed people the support they need, but previously could not get, while 
they start their own businesses. We will maintain special help for the long-term 
unemployed through the Community Programme, and for the older unemployed through 
early retirement schemes. 
Removing the Barriers to Jobs 
We shall go on reducing the barriers which discourage employers from recruiting 
more staff, even when they want to. And we shall help to make the job market 
more flexible and efficient so that more people can work part-time if they wish, 
and find work more easily. 
That is why we have amended the Employment Protection Act and why we shall 
continue to: 
  minimise the legal restrictions which discourage the creation of new jobs; 
  encourage moves towards greater flexibility in working practices, such as 
  Part-Time Job Release, which makes it financially possible for people nearing 
  retirement age to go part-time; and the Job-Splitting Scheme which helps 
  employers to split a whole-time job into two part-time jobs; 
  improve the efficiency of the employment services in identifying and filling 
  job vacancies; 
  ensure that Wages Councils do not reduce job opportunities by forcing workers 
  to charge unrealistic pay rates, or employers to offer them. 
Training 
If we are to make the most of the employment opportunities that present 
themselves in an age of rapid change and more varied patterns of work and 
occupation, up-to-date training is essential. 
Training for work must start with better, more relevant education at school. For 
school leavers, we have provided the most imaginative and far-reaching scheme in 
our history. The Youth Training Scheme offers every 16-year old a year of 
serious training for work. It should help 350,000 youngsters by the autumn of 
this year. From now on, no one leaving school at 16 need be unemployed in his 
first year out of school. 
This is only a part of our wider strategy to ensure effective training for the 
skills and jobs of tomorrow - on a scale and of a quality to match the world's 
best. At its heart is our reform of industrial training and the apprenticeship 
system. 
We are improving the scope and quality of our training for the employed and 
unemployed alike; tackling problems which the Labour Party has never had the 
courage to face. 
We shall continue to provide for, and improve, the special employment and 
training needs of the disabled, and to reform our training agencies to meet more 
effectively the needs of industry and workers alike. 
The Nationalised Industries 
Reform of the nationalised industries is central to economic recovery. Most 
people who work in these industries work hard and have a sense of public 
service. Since 1979, we have gone to great lengths to improve the performance of 
the state sector, to appoint top-class managers and work closely with them to 
tackle each industry's problems. 
But for all this, few people can now believe that state ownership means better 
service to the customer. The old illusions have melted away. Nationalisation 
does not improve job satisfaction, job security or labour relations - almost all 
the serious strikes in recent years have been in state industries and services. 
We have also seen how the burden of financing the state industries has kept 
taxes and government borrowing higher than they need have been. 
A company which has to satisfy its customers and compete to survive is more 
likely to be efficient, alert to innovation, and genuinely accountable to the 
public. That is why we have transferred to private ownership, in whole or in 
part, Cable and Wireless, Associated British Ports, British Aerospace, Britoil, 
British Rail Hotels, Amersham International, and the National Freight 
Corporation. Many of their shares have been bought by their own employees and 
managers, which is the truest public ownership of all. 
We shall continue our programme to expose state-owned firms to real competition. 
In telecommunications, we have licensed a new independent network, Mercury, and 
have decided to license two mobile telephone networks. We have allowed 
competition in commercial postal services. Already, standards of service are 
beginning to improve. Investment is rising. And better job opportunities are 
being opened up. 
We shall transfer more state-owned businesses to independent ownership. Our aim 
is that British Telecom - where we will sell 51 per cent of the shares to the 
private sector Rolls Royce, British Airways and substantial parts of British 
Steel, of British Shipbuilders and of British Leyland, and as many as possible 
of Britain's airports, shall become private sector companies. We also aim to 
introduce substantial private capital into the National Bus Company. As before, 
we will offer shares to all those who work in them. 
We shall also transfer to the private sector the remaining state-owned oil 
business - the British Gas Corporation's offshore oil interests. 
We have abolished the Gas Corporation's statutory monopoly of the supply of 
North Sea gas to industry. Already there has been a vigorous new lease of life 
for gas exploration and development in the North Sea, which had ground to a 
complete halt under Labour. In the last Parliament, we passed a law to encourage 
the private generation of electricity. In the next Parliament, we shall seek 
other means of increasing competition in, and attracting private capital into, 
the gas and electricity industries. 
Merely to replace state monopolies by private ones would be to waste an historic 
opportunity. So we will take steps to ensure that these new firms do not exploit 
their powerful positions to the detriment of consumers or their competitors. 
Those nationalised industries which cannot be privatised or organised as smaller 
and more efficient units will be given top-quality management and required to 
work to clear guidelines. 
ENCOURAGING FREE ENTERPRISE
We want to see an economy in which firms, large and small, have every incentive 
to expand by winning extra business and creating more jobs. This Conservative 
Government has been both giving those incentives and clearing away the obstacles 
to expansion: the high rates of tax on individuals and businesses; the 
difficulties facing the small firm trying to grow, and the self-employed man 
trying to set up on his own; the blockages in the planning system; the 
bottlenecks on our roads; the restrictions on our farmers and fishermen; and the 
resistance to new ideas and technologies. 
In the last four years, many British firms have made splendid progress in 
improving their competitiveness and profitability. But there is some way to go 
yet before this country has regained that self-renewing capacity for growth 
which once made her a great economic power, and will make her great again. 
Only a government which really works to promote free enterprise can provide the 
right conditions for that dream to come true. 
Lower and Simpler Taxes 
In the last four years, we have made great strides in reducing and simplifying 
taxes. We have: 
  cut the basic rate of income tax; raised tax allowances above the level we 
  inherited after allowing for price rises; brought the higher rates of income 
  tax down to European levels; and made big reductions in the investment income 
  surcharge, which have particularly helped the old; 
  removed many of the worst features of Capital Transfer Tax, Capital Gains Tax 
  and Development Land Tax; 
  cut business taxes, in particular the National Insurance Surcharge, Labour's 
  tax on jobs, from 3½ per cent to 1 per cent; and improved stock relief for 
  businesses; 
  much reduced the taxes on, and increased the incentives for, gifts to 
  charities; 
  greatly reduced tax bureaucracy. Manpower in the Inland Revenue and Customs & 
  Excise has fallen from 113,400 in April 1979 to 98,500 in April 1983, and is 
  set to fall further. 
This dramatic progress is all the more striking when compared with the vast 
increases in taxation which our opponents' policies would inevitably bring. 
The changes to this year's Finance Act on which Labour have insisted show that 
they intend just this. We shall reverse those changes at the earliest 
opportunity. 
Further improvements in allowances and lower rates of income tax remain a high 
priority, together with measures to reduce the poverty and unemployment traps. 
We want to encourage wider ownership. This means lowering taxes on capital and 
savings; encouraging individuals to invest directly in company shares; and 
encouraging the creation of more employee share schemes. 
More Small Firms 
We have reduced the burdens on small firms, especially in employment legislation 
and planning, and cut many of the taxes they pay, particularly Corporation Tax. 
Our Loan Guarantee Scheme has already backed extra lending of over £300m. to 
about 10,000 small firms. The new Business Expansion Scheme, a major extension 
of the Business Start-up Scheme, will encourage outside investment in small 
companies by special tax reliefs. The construction of new premises for small 
businesses has more than doubled. 
To help the engineering industry and the areas most dependent on it, we have 
introduced and now extended a very successful scheme of grants (SEFIS) to 
smaller firms, which help them to buy new machinery. 
Thanks to these policies and over one hundred other important measures, the 
climate for new and smaller businesses in the UK has been transformed and is now 
as favourable as anywhere in the world. 
Help for the New Technologies 
Even during the recession, our new industries and technologies made remarkable 
progress. Britain has more micro-computers in relation to its population than 
any other country. We have speeded this progress by supporting research and 
spreading knowledge of the technologies of tomorrow; and by increasing 
government support for the new technologies from £100m. in 1978-9 to over £350m. 
in 1983-4. But that is only the beginning. We will now: 
  promote, in partnership with industry, the Alvey programme for research into 
  advanced information technology; 
  accelerate the transfer of technology from the university laboratory to the 
  market place, especially by the encouragement of science parks; 
  help firms to launch new products through pilot schemes and public purchasing; 

  build on the successes of our 'Micros-in-Schools' scheme and our network of 
  Information Technology Centres for the young unemployed so that they are 
  equipped with tomorrow's skills; 
  sanction the launch of new cable networks to bring wider choice to consumers, 
  not just for entertainment, but for the whole new world of tele-shopping and 
  tele-banking. 
Regions, Enterprise Zones and Freeports 
We shall continue to maintain an effective regional policy which is essential to 
ease the process of change and encourage new businesses in areas which have been 
dependent on declining industries. We do not propose sudden changes in regional 
policy. But we will: 
  make sure that these policies are economical and effective in creating genuine 
  jobs; 
  secure more effective co-ordination between central and local government and 
  the European Community's Regional Development Fund to ensure that their 
  actions offer the greatest help to communities in need; 
  further develop local self-help initiatives, the 24 Enterprise Zones and, our 
  latest innovation, duty-free trading zones, which will be established in 
  certain experimental 'Freeports'; 
  diversify regional economies by encouraging the fullest use of our schemes for 
  innovation. 
Planning 
In our crowded country the planning system has to strike a delicate balance. It 
must provide for the homes and workplaces we need. It must protect the 
environment in which we live. 
One particular way to achieve this is by bringing back into use the thousands of 
acres lying derelict and unused, so much of which is in the ownership of local 
authorities or other public bodies. We have set up Land Registers to identify 
this land, and we shall now use our powers to bring it into use. The more this 
land can be used, the less the need to build on Green Belts and the countryside. 
We will also bring open-cast coalmining within normal proper planning control, 
and we shall establish more control over intensive livestock units near 
residential areas. 
Energy 
Britain has come from nowhere to be the world's fifth largest oil producer. The 
North Sea success story has been a triumph of private enterprise for the 
nation's benefit. We shall continue to ensure that our taxation and licensing 
policies encourage development in the North Sea. 
In the next Parliament, the interests of the whole country require Britain's 
massive coal industry, on which we depend for the overwhelming bulk of our 
electricity generation, to return to economic viability. 
We shall press ahead with the development of safe nuclear power. It is an 
important way of securing lower-cost electricity for the future. We shall set up 
an Energy Efficiency Office to co-ordinate the Government's conservation effort, 
so as to ensure that the taxpayer gets the best value for money. 
We recognise that some energy users have special needs. This is why we have: 
  ensured that standing charges no longer dominate the bills of small gas and 
  electricity consumers; 
  increased help for the needy with their fuel bills, leading to many fewer 
  disconnections; 
and 
  introduced more favourable terms for the energy-intensive industries. 
Better Transport for Industry 
The national motorway and trunk road network will continue to be developed and 
improved to high-quality standards. This will not only make driving much safer 
for all, but also speed and cheapen the transport of goods. We will also seek to 
make rail freight more competitive. 
Many of our ports have now been returned from state control to independent 
ownership. We intend that they should provide profitable and efficient services 
without the taxpayers' support. 
Tourism 
Our hotels, resorts and tourist attractions are important because they provide 
hundreds of thousands of jobs, earn valuable foreign exchange, and provide 
holidays for millions of our own people. We shall continue to support the 
Tourist Boards and tourism projects throughout the country. 
Farming and Fishing 
British farming and horticulture have improved dramatically since 1979. Exports 
have leapt to £2,500m. a year. Since 1978, our self-sufficiency in food has 
risen by more than a sixth, from 53 per cent to 62 per cent. 
In Europe, our tough negotiating stance has doubled our farmers' share of the 
help available under the Common Agricultural Policy. The cost of the CAP to 
British taxpayers doubled under Labour. Under us, it has been falling in real 
terms. We have reversed the Labour Government's disastrous policy for the Green 
Pound which harmed British farmers. At the same time, we have not neglected the 
consumers' interest. Food prices more than doubled under Labour and rose faster 
than other prices. Under the Conservatives, they have risen less than other 
prices. Last year they grew by less than one per cent, the smallest rise for 
nearly twenty years. 
We have given special help to Britain's hill farmers, and agreed very worthwhile 
Community schemes for beef and sheepmeat. These have all brought great benefits 
to Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland and the uplands of England. We have 
launched successfully the 'Food from Britain' campaign, which should help us 
sell far more of our products both at home and in the rest of the Community. 
We shall help the glasshouse industry to sell more fruit and vegetables, and to 
make use of the best possible arrangements for heating and insulation. 
We welcome the fact that, after long negotiations, the National Farmers' Union 
and the Country Landowners' Association have agreed on the best way to make more 
farm tenancies available for young people. We shall legislate on these lines at 
an early opportunity. We intend to make sure that British agriculture and 
horticulture continue to make the greatest possible contribution to our economic 
success. 
We have successfully negotiated a Common Fishing Agreement that provides British 
fishermen with the greatest advantages in our waters in the industry's history. 
For the first time since we joined the Community, we now have effective 
conservation measures, and can look forward to expanding, rather than declining, 
stocks of fish. During the next Parliament, we shall introduce measures to 
restructure the fishing industry and to encourage investment and better 
marketing. 
RESPONSIBILITY AND THE FAMILY
Freedom and responsibility go together. The Conservative Party believes in 
encouraging people to take responsibility for their own decisions. We shall 
continue to return more choice to individuals and their families. That is the 
way to increase personal freedom. It is also the way to improve standards in the 
state services. 
Conservatives believe equally strongly in the duty of Government to help those 
who are least able to help themselves. We have more than carried out our pledges 
to protect pensioners against price rises and to maintain standards in the 
National Health Service. This rebuts the totally unfounded charge that we want 
to 'dismantle the Welfare State'. We are determined that our public services 
should provide the best possible value both for people they seek to help and for 
the taxpayer who pays the bill. 
A free and independent society is one in which the ownership of property is 
spread as widely as possible. A business which is partly or wholly owned by its 
workers will have more pride in performance. Already firms like the National 
Freight Company, where managers and workers joined together to take over the 
business, are thriving. 
Under this Government, the property-owning democracy is growing fast. And the 
basic foundation of it is the family home. 
Housing: Towards a Home-owning Democracy 
We have given every council and New Town tenant the legal right to buy his or 
her own home. Many Housing Association tenants have been granted the same right, 
too. This is the biggest single step towards a home-owning democracy ever taken. 
It is also the largest transfer of property from the State to the individual. No 
less than half a million council houses and flats were sold in the last 
Parliament to the people who live in them. By our encouragement of private 
housebuilding and our new range of schemes to help first-time buyers, there are 
a million more owner-occupiers today than four years ago. 
The Labour Party has met these proposals with vicious and prolonged resistance 
and is still fighting a rearguard action against wider home ownership. A Labour 
government would take away the tenant's right to buy his council house, would 
prevent councils selling even voluntarily at a discount, and would force any 
former tenant who wanted to sell his house to sell it back to the council. 
In the next Parliament, we will give many thousand more families the chance to 
buy their homes. For public sector tenants, the present 'Right to Buy' scheme 
will be improved and extended to include the right to buy houses on leasehold 
land and the right to buy on a shared ownership basis. The maximum discount will 
be increased by one per cent a year for those who have been tenants for between 
twenty and thirty years, taking the maximum discount to 60 per cent. We shall 
also help first-time buyers who are not council tenants through our various 
low-cost home-ownership schemes: 'homesteading', building for sale, improvement 
for sale, and shared ownership. 
Britain needs more homes to rent, too, in the private sector as well as the 
public sector. For years, the blind prejudice of the Labour Party has cast a 
political blight on privately rented housing. But our assured tenancy scheme has 
encouraged builders to start building new homes to rent again, and our shorthold 
scheme is helping the private sector to meet the needs of those who want 
short-term rented accommodation. 
We shall extend our Tenants' Charter to enable council tenants to get necessary 
repairs done themselves and be reimbursed by their councils. Housing Improvement 
Grants have been increased substantially in the last two years and will continue 
to play an important role. 
We shall conduct early public consultation of proposals which would enable the 
building societies to play a fuller part in supporting the provision of new 
housing and would bring up to date the laws which govern them. 
Our goal is to make Britain the best housed nation in Europe. 
Protecting the Pensioner 
Over the last four years, the retirement pension has risen from £19.50 to £32.85 
a week for a single person and from £31.20 to £52.55 for a married couple. Even 
after allowing for price rises, pensioners can buy more with their pension today 
than they could under the last Labour government. We have ended Labour's 
unreliable system of relying on forecasts of price rises to decide by how much 
to increase the pension. In five of the last seven years, those forecasts turned 
out to be wrong. In future, pensions will be related to actual and not estimated 
price increases. 
In the next Parliament, we shall continue to protect retirement pensions and 
other linked long-term benefits against rising prices. Public sector pensioners 
will also continue to be protected on the basis of realistic pension 
contributions. In this Parliament, we raised to £57 a week the amount pensioners 
may earn without losing any of their pension. It remains our intention to 
continue raising the limit and to abolish this earnings rule as soon as we can. 
The Christmas Bonus, which Labour failed to pay in 1975 and 1976, will continue 
to be paid every year in accordance with the law we passed in 1979. 
Over 11.5m. people - half the working population - are now covered by 
occupational pension schemes. We will consider how the pension rights of 'early 
leavers', people who change jobs, can be better protected and how their members 
may be given fuller information about their pension schemes. 
Social Security 
Supplementary benefits, too, have been raised ahead of prices. To encourage 
thrift, instead of penalising it, the Government has also raised the amount of 
savings people can keep without losing any supplementary benefit. At the same 
time, we have clamped down firmly on fraud and abuse of social security. 
Expenditure on cash benefits to the disabled is 21 per cent higher than under 
Labour, even after allowing for rising prices. There has been extra help, too, 
for those who are least able to afford their fuel bills. 
We have introduced - and extended - a widows' bereavement allowance. We have 
kept the war widows' pension ahead of prices and removed it from tax altogether. 

Child benefit and one-parent benefit are to be raised in November to their 
highest-ever level in real terms. We have also improved the family income 
supplement scheme to help low-paid working families. 
Our record shows the strength of our commitment. But our ability to help depends 
on the wealth which the country produces. In Britain today, over 40p in every 
pound of public spending is already devoted to health and social security. It is 
hypocritical for the Labour party to pretend that they could raise public 
spending on benefits by thousands of millions of pounds without admitting the 
vast increases in taxation and national insurance contributions that would be 
needed, or the increased inflation that would result. 
The National Health Service 
We have more than matched our pledge to maintain spending on the National Health 
Service and secure proper value for money. Even after allowing for price rises, 
the nation is spending substantially more on health, and getting better health 
care. 
By last year, there were 45,000 more nurses and midwives, and over 6,500 more 
doctors and dentists, working for the NHS than in 1978. This has helped to make 
it possible to treat over two million more patients a year in our hospitals. 
Until last year's futile strike, waiting lists for treatment fell sharply. 
We intend to continue to make sure that all patients receive the best possible 
value for the money that is spent on the Health Service. The treatment of the 
elderly, the mentally handicapped and the mentally ill will continue to make 
extra provision for those parts of the country in the North and the Midlands 
which have always been comparatively short of resources. 
Unlike the last Labour government which actually cut the hospital building 
programme by one-third, we have committed £1,100m. to our large-scale programme 
for building new hospitals. There are now 140 new hospitals in that programme 
being designed or built. We shall continue to upgrade existing hospitals and 
brighten up shabby wards. 
To release more money for looking after patients, we will reduce the costs of 
administering the Health Service. We are asking health authorities to make the 
maximum possible savings by putting services like laundry, catering and hospital 
cleaning out to 
competitive tender. We are tightening up, too, on management costs, and getting 
much firmer control of staff numbers. 
Most people who are ill or frail would prefer to stay in or near their own 
homes, rather than live in a hospital or institution. Helping people to stay in 
familiar surroundings is the aim of our policy 'Care in the Community'. The 
Government has given extra powers and extra cash to health authorities to enable 
them to finance such community care for individual patients on a long-term 
basis. 
Partnership in Care 
Conservatives reject Labour's contention that the State can and should do 
everything. 
We welcome the growth in private health insurance in recent years. This has both 
made more health care available, and lightened the load on the NHS, particularly 
for non-urgent operations. We shall continue to encourage this valuable 
supplement to state care. We shall promote closer partnership between the State 
and the private sectors in the exchange of facilities and of ideas in the 
interests of all patients. 
We also welcome the vital contribution made by voluntary organisations in the 
social services. We shall continue to give them strong support. The Conservative 
Government has already made many radical changes in law and taxation which have 
greatly improved the way charities and voluntary bodies are financed. The terms 
governing gifts under covenants have been much improved, and the liability to 
capital taxation has been lightened or swept away. 
We shall continue to support our highly successful 'Opportunities for 
Volunteering' scheme. In the next Parliament, we shall develop other new ways to 
encourage more private giving. 
Schools: The Pursuit of Excellence 
For a long time now, parents have been worried about standards and discipline in 
many of our schools. This Conservative Government has responded to that worry 
with the Parents' Charter and the 1980 Education Act. For the first time: 
  local authorities were obliged to take account of parents' choice of school 
  for their children; 
  schools were obliged to publish prospectuses, giving details of their 
  examination results; 
  parents were given the right to be represented on school governing bodies; 
  the Government offered Assisted Places to enable less well-off parents to send 
  bright children to some of the best independent schools. 
Giving parents more power is one of the most effective ways of raising 
educational standards. We shall continue to seek ways of widening parental 
choice and influence over their children's schooling. 
We shall defend Church schools and independent schools alike against our 
opponents' attacks. And we shall defend the right of parents to spend their own 
money on educating their children. 
This country is now spending more per child in school than ever before, even 
after allowing for price rises. As a result, the average number of children per 
teacher is the lowest ever. Exactly how the money is spent, and how schools are 
run, is up to local education authorities. 
But the Government can help improve standards and make sure that children are 
taught and trained for the world they will grow up into. 
  Until now, HM Inspectors' reports have remained secret. Now we are publishing 
  them and making sure they are followed up, too. 
  We are not satisfied with the selection or the training of our teachers. Our 
  White Paper sets out an important programme for improving teacher training 
  colleges. 
  We shall switch the emphasis in the Education Welfare Service back to school 
  attendance, so as to reduce truancy. 
  We have given special help for refresher courses for teachers, research into 
  special schools, and play groups and nursery schools where they are most 
  needed. 
  We shall also encourage schools to keep proper records of their pupils' 
  achievements, buy more computers, and carry out external graded tests. The 
  public examination system will be improved, and O-level standards will be 
  maintained. 
  We are setting up fourteen pilot projects to bring better technical education 
  to teenagers. The success of these will play a vital part in raising technical 
  training in Britain to the level of our best overseas competitors. 
Higher Education 
Our universities and polytechnics, too, must generate new ideas and train the 
skilled workforce of the next generation. We have unrivalled institutions and 
unrivalled inventive genius - as the number of British Nobel prize-winners 
shows. What matters is to bring the two closer together and make the best 
practical use of both. 
Britain has more students in professional training than Japan, and a greater 
proportion of young people in higher education than France or West Germany. More 
of our young people are now entering full-time degree courses than under the 
last Labour government. And a larger proportion of them complete their courses 
than in most other countries. 
The very large sums of public money now going to higher education must be spent 
in the most effective way. Within that budget, we want to see a shift towards 
technological, scientific and engineering courses. 
  We have set aside money for 700 new posts for young lecturers over three years 
  to bring new blood into research. 
  Over the next three years, we will provide for more teaching and research on 
  information technology, with new posts for lecturers, and 2,200 new places for 
  students. 
Sport and Recreation 
The Government has increased the real level of funding for the Sports Council. 
The Urban Aid and Derelict Land Programmes have also contributed to new sporting 
projects. By these means, and by offering one pound of government money for 
every one pound raised locally, we have begun to transform sports facilities in 
the inner cities.But there are still plenty of sports facilities which could be 
opened up to the general public. In particular, to reinforce our initiatives for 
better use of schools and playing fields, we shall urge every local education 
authority to make school and college premises available for use outside school 
hours and in the holidays. In all these initiatives, voluntary bodies will be 
enabled to play a bigger part. 
We have kept up the pressure for public access to parks and reservoirs for 
anglers and all those who enjoy and respect the countryside. 
Safety. Quality and Value For Money 
The best way to protect the consumer is to bring price rises down and keep them 
down, and to increase competition. We have achieved both, and so helped the 
housewife far more than any bureaucratic system of controls. We have also 
brought the state industries under the scrutiny of the Monopolies and Mergers 
Commission, and exposed many of them to competition to prevent them from 
exploiting their customers. 
We shall remain vigilant in defence of the quality and safety of the products 
people buy. But we shall also reduce government intervention wherever it is 
unnecessary or harmful to the interests of the customer. 
The provisions of our Data Protection Bill will meet public concern that 
computers pose a particular threat to privacy, and will enable us to ratify the 
European Convention on Data Protection. 
Supporting Family Life 
It is not for the Government to try to dictate how men and women should organise 
their lives. Our approach is to help people and their families fulfil their own 
aspirations in a rapidly changing world. As an employer, this Government is 
fulfilling its commitment to equal opportunities for men and women who work in 
the public services. We have brought forward for public discussion proposals for 
improving the tax treatment of married women, whether or not they go out to 
work. 
We are reviewing the family jurisdiction of the courts, including their 
conciliation role, with a view to improving the administration of family law. We 
shall also reform the divorce laws to offer further protection to children, and 
to secure fairer financial arrangements when a marriage ends. 
LAW, DEMOCRACY AND THE CITIZEN
The rule of law matters deeply to every one of us. Any concession to the thief, 
the thug or the terrorist undermines that principle which is the foundation of 
all our liberties. That is why we have remained firm in the face of the threats 
of hijackers and hunger strikers alike. The defeat of the occupation of the 
Iranian Embassy is only one example of our determination to be patient but still 
unyielding. 
Backing the Crime-Fighters 
We recognised from the start the immense and continuing public concern about 
lawlessness, particularly in some of our larger cities. We acted immediately to 
fulfil our pledges to give the hard-pressed police every possible backing. 
  The strength of the police force now stands at record levels: 9,000 extra 
  policemen have been recruited in England and Wales alone since 1979. They are 
  much better paid and equipped than ever before. We shall be ready to increase 
  police establishments where necessary in the war against crime. 
  Thousands more policemen are back on the beat, where the public wishes to see 
  them, instead of being isolated in panda cars. It takes time for any reform in 
  police training and methods to achieve its full effect, but already street 
  crime is being reduced and public confidence improved in some of the worst 
  inner-city areas. 
  The proposals embodied in our Police and Criminal Evidence Bill will help the 
  police to bring criminals to justice. At the same time, they will reinforce 
  public support for the police by laying down clear rules for the proper 
  treatment of suspects. We shall also build more courtrooms to reduce delays in 
  trying criminal cases. 
  Last year's Criminal Justice Act has given the courts tougher and more 
  flexible sentencing powers. This Act makes parents more responsible for crimes 
  committed by their children, and improves compensation for the victims of 
  crime. 
  Courts will also continue to impose Community Service Orders which compel 
  offenders to make amends by doing useful work for the local community. We 
  shall set up more compulsory attendance centres to which the courts can send 
  young hooligans. The invaluable work of the Probation Service will continue to 
  be supported. 
  There must be enough prison places to cope with sentences imposed by the 
  courts. We shall complete our major programme of building which will provide 
  another 4,800 places in ten new prisons. And we are recruiting more prison 
  officers to staff them. 
  We will also respond to the increasing public concern over obscenity and 
  offences against public decency, which often have links with serious crime. We 
  propose to introduce specific legislation to deal with the most serious of 
  these problems, such as the dangerous spread of violent and obscene video 
  cassettes. 
  We accept the case for an independent prosecution service, and will consider 
  how it might best be set up. 
  We intend to extend substantially the grounds that disqualify those with 
  criminal records from serving on juries. 
Dealing with crimes, civil disobedience, violent demonstrations and pornography 
are not matters for the police alone. It is teachers and parents - and 
television producers, too - who influence the moral standards of the next 
generation. There must be close co-operation and understanding between the 
police and the community they serve. 
Immigration: Firm and Fair 
We are utterly opposed to racial discrimination wherever it occurs, and we are 
determined to see that there is real equality of opportunity. The Conservative 
Party is, and always has been, strongly opposed to unfairness, harassment and 
persecution, whether it be inspired by racial, religious or ideological motives. 

To have good community relations, we have to maintain effective immigration 
control. Since 1979, immigration for settlement has dropped sharply to the 
lowest level since control of immigration from the Commonwealth began more than 
twenty years ago. By passing the British Nationality Act, we have created a 
secure system of rights and a sound basis for control in the future; and we will 
continue to pursue policies which are strict but fair. 
The Supremacy of Parliament 
The British Constitution has outlasted most of the alternatives which have been 
offered as replacements. It is because we stand firm for the supremacy of 
Parliament that we are determined to keep its rules and procedures in good 
repair. 
We have modernised the Select Committees to improve Parliament's ability to keep 
a check on the actions of the Executive. We shall continue to pursue sensible, 
carefully considered reforms where they are of practical value. 
Labour want to abolish the House of Lords. We will ensure that it has a secure 
and effective future. A strong Second Chamber is a vital safeguard for democracy 
and contributes to good government. 
Northern Ireland 
In Northern Ireland, building upon the courage, commitment and increasing 
success of our security forces, we will give the highest priority to upholding 
law and order. We will continue to give the support essential for the Province 
to overcome its economic difficulties. 
The people of Northern Ireland will continue to be offered a framework for 
participation in local democracy and political progress through the Assembly. 
There will be no change in Northern Ireland's constitutional position in the 
United Kingdom without the consent of the majority of people there, and no 
devolution of powers without widespread support throughout the community. We 
believe that a close practical working relationship between the United Kingdom 
and the Government of the Republic can contribute to peace and stability in 
Northern Ireland without threatening in any way the position of the majority 
community in the Province. 
The Quality of Government 
This country is fortunate to have a Civil Service with high standards of 
administration and integrity. The Civil Service has loyally and effectively 
helped to carry through the far-reaching changes we have made to secure greater 
economy, efficiency and better management in Government itself. It is a tribute 
to this spirit of co-operation that the number of civil servants has been 
reduced from 732,000 to 649,000 with the minimum of redundancies and with higher 
standards of service to the citizen. This has saved the taxpayer about £500m. a 
year, and is helping us to improve civil service working conditions. 
The efficiency 'scrutinies' launched by Lord Rayner and other money-saving 
techniques have now identified savings worth £400m. a year to the taxpayer. We 
have abolished 500 Quangos and done away with no less than 3,600 different types 
of government forms. 
We are successfully putting out to tender more services needed by central 
government. We shall press on with this wherever public money can be saved and 
standards of service maintained or improved. 
Public spending is now planned in terms of hard cash instead of so-called 
constant prices, and the discipline of cash limits on spending has been 
extended. As a result, public spending is firmly under control. 
Local Government: Saving Ratepayers' Money 
We have checked the relentless growth of local government spending, and manpower 
is now back down to the level of 1974. The achievement of many Conservative 
authorities in saving ratepayers' money by putting services like refuse 
collection out to tender has played a major part in getting better value for 
money and significantly reducing the level of rate increases. We shall encourage 
every possible saving by this policy. 
There are, however, a number of grossly extravagant Labour authorities whose 
exorbitant rate demands have caused great distress both to businesses and 
domestic ratepayers. We shall legislate to curb excessive and irresponsible rate 
increases by high-spending councils, and to provide a general scheme for 
limitation of rate increases for all local authorities to be used if necessary. 
In addition, for industry we will require local authorities to consult local 
representatives of industry and commerce before setting their rates. We shall 
give more businesses the right to pay by instalments. And we shall stop the 
rating of empty industrial property. 
The Metropolitan Councils and the Greater London Council have been shown to be a 
wasteful and unnecessary tier of government. We shall abolish them and return 
most of their functions to the boroughs and districts. Services which need to be 
administered over a wider area - such as police and fire, and education in inner 
London - will be run by joint boards of borough or district representatives. 
IMPROVING OUR ENVIRONMENT
The Conservative Party has a long record of practical and effective action to 
improve the quality of life in our cities and countryside and to preserve our 
heritage. Since 1979, no government in Western Europe has done more for the 
environment - a clumsy word for many of the things that make life worth living. 
Reviving Britain's Cities 
We have to cure the disastrous mistakes of decades of town-hall Socialism by 
striking a better balance between public and private effort. Our approach to 
reviving the rundown areas of our great cities is to use limited public money to 
stimulate much larger investment by private enterprise. The £60m. we have 
earmarked for the Urban Development Grant this year will be matched by up to 
four times that sum from private firms investing in new developments. On 
Merseyside, Operation Groundwork has brought together landowners, local industry 
and local authorities to tackle the squalor and dereliction on the edge of 
towns. The lessons of this and many other Merseyside initiatives will now be 
applied in other urban areas. 
We have encouraged people to move back into the inner cities. Builders are now 
being helped to build homes of the type that young couples in particular can 
afford. We shall promote this revival of our inner cities, both by new building, 
and by sales by local councils of some of their rundown property to homesteaders 
who will restore the homes themselves. 
We shall encourage greater opportunity for all those who live in our inner 
cities, including our ethnic minorities. 
  Our small business schemes are helping to bring firms back into the city 
  centres, and the Enterprise Zones we have set up are already bringing new life 
  to some of the hardest-hit places in industrial Britain. 
  We shall continue to give priority to the areas most in need. Our programme 
  for the reclamation of derelict land will continue. We shall increase our 
  efforts to secure the disposal of under-used public sector land, using the 
  powers available to us in order to require sites to be sold for homes and 
  jobs. 
Public Transport 
We have already taken important steps to improve the standards of public 
transport. We have lifted restrictions on long-distance coach services. As a 
result, about one hundred new express coach services have been started, fares 
have been substantially reduced and comfort improved. We shall further relax bus 
licensing to permit a wider variety of services. We shall encourage the creation 
of smaller units in place of the monolithic public transport organisations which 
we have inherited from the Socialist past, and encourage more flexible forms of 
public transport. City buses and underground railways will still need reasonable 
levels of subsidy. But greater efficiency and more private enterprise will help 
keep costs down. 
The GLC has grossly mismanaged London Transport. We shall set up a new London 
Regional Transport Authority for the underground, buses and commuter trains in 
the London area. This will provide the opportunity to split the different types 
of transport into separate operating bodies, put more services out to private 
tender and offer the passenger better performance. 
In the country, we shall ensure better use of school and special buses for local 
communities. Restrictions on minibuses will be cut. So will the red tape which 
makes it so difficult for small firms and voluntary bodies to provide better 
ways to get around for those without cars, particularly the very old and the 
disabled. 
We want to see a high-quality, efficient railway service. That does not mean 
simply providing ever-larger subsidies from the taxpayer. Nor, on the other 
hand, does it mean embarking upon a programme of major route closures. There is, 
however, scope for substantial cost reductions in British Rail which are needed 
to justify investment in a modern and efficient railway. 
Fewer restrictive practices and much more attention to the customer are also 
essential. Rail services are now facing vigorous competition from coaches and 
cars, and they need to respond with more innovative and more modern work 
methods. We shall examine ways of decentralising BR and bringing in private 
enterprise to serve railway customers. 
To make life more agreeable in our towns and villages, we will push ahead our 
bypass programme, which will help to take more lorries away from them. 
Rural Policy and Animal Welfare 
Conservatives understand the need for a proper balance between the strengthening 
of the rural economy and the preservation of the beauty and habitat of our 
countryside. 
Economic development will be encouraged in areas where this balance can be best 
maintained. At the same time, we have introduced the Wildlife and Countryside 
Act - the most important piece of legislation yet affecting the countryside - to 
safeguard areas of natural beauty and sites of scientific interest. 
We have taken the lead in the much acclaimed measures to save the whale from 
extinction and to protect seals, and we shall co-operate fully in the important 
international work to protect all endangered species. 
Since 1979, we have been working to achieve full European agreement on the 
treatment of animals. We have introduced measures to improve the conditions of 
farm animals being transported or exported. There is now a European Convention 
on the Protection of Animals. We welcomed this agreement, and immediately 
introduced a White Paper on Animal Welfare to foreshadow changes in the law. We 
now propose to introduce legislation to update the Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 
which will ensure more humane treatment of laboratory animals in scientific and 
industrial research. The sale of pet animals in street markets has been banned. 
Controlling Pollution 
We intend to remove lead from petrol, and are taking the initiative with our 
European partners to achieve this at the earliest possible date. We will press 
ahead with our plans to reduce lead in paints, food and drinking water. 
We will continue our policy to reduce river pollution - the length of polluted 
rivers has been halved in the last ten years, and this work will continue. We 
shall tighten up the controls on the disposal of hazardous waste and continue to 
support the movement for recycling and reclamation. 
The worst problems of air pollution have been resolved. But in some areas the 
levels of smoke and sulphur dioxide need to be further reduced. 
The peaceful application of nuclear energy, if properly controlled (as it always 
has been in this country), will be beneficial to the environment as well as to 
the economy. We intend to make sure that the safety record of the British 
nuclear industry continues to be second to none. The Sizewell Inquiry into 
Britain's first Pressurised Water Reactor is well under way. The project will go 
ahead only if both the independent inspector and the Government are satisfied it 
is safe. 
Arts and the Heritage 
Despite the recession, this Government has strengthened its support for the best 
of our heritage and for the performing arts. We have created the National 
Heritage Memorial Fund, which fulfils the long-delayed wish to commemorate the 
dead of two world wars in a permanent and tangible way. We are building a new 
British Library. The new Commission for Ancient Monuments and Historic Buildings 
will both safeguard our heritage and give more people a chance to enjoy it. 
Under the Conservatives, Britain's opera, theatre and ballet continue to win 
world-wide renown. And our tax changes have helped to revive the British film 
industry. We shall keep up the level of government support, including a fair 
share for the regions. We shall also examine ways of using the tax system to 
encourage further growth in private support for the arts and the heritage. 
BRITAIN IN THE WORLD
For nearly four decades, Europe has been at peace. The strength of the Western 
Alliance has kept our own freedoms secure. The possession of nuclear weapons by 
both sides has been an effective deterrent to another war in Europe. 
The policies which our Labour opponents now propose would put at risk all this 
hard-won security. 
The Protection of Peace 
The invasion of Afghanistan and the suppression of dissent in Poland remind us 
of the true nature of the Soviet Union. It remains a threat to the liberty and 
security of the West. The Soviet Union maintains massive armed forces in Europe, 
and is extending its naval power throughout the world. Soviet nuclear strength 
continues to grow, despite the false assurances of their propaganda machine. 
Labour's support for gestures of one-sided disarmament is reckless and naive. 
There is no shred of evidence to suggest that the Soviet bloc would follow such 
an example. 
Labour would give up Britain's nuclear deterrent and prevent the United States 
from using its bases in Britain which are part of its nuclear shield over 
Europe. That would shatter the NATO Alliance, and put our safety in the greatest 
jeopardy. 
We will fully support the negotiations to reduce the deployment of nuclear 
weapons. But we will not gamble with our defence. 
The Soviet Union now has over one thousand SS20 warheads, two-thirds of which 
are targeted on Europe. If the Soviet Union does not recognise over the coming 
months the legitimate anxieties of the West by agreeing to our proposals to 
eliminate this class of weapons, we will start deploying cruise missiles by the 
end of this year. Even after this, the West will remain entirely ready to 
negotiate for the removal of some or all of the missiles which we deploy, on the 
basis of a balanced and fair agreement with the Soviet Union. 
The Western Alliance can keep the peace only if we can convince any potential 
aggressor that he would have to pay an unacceptable price. To do so, NATO must 
have strong conventional forces backed by a nuclear deterrent. And we in Britain 
must maintain our own independent nuclear contribution to British and European 
defence. At the same time, we shall continue to support all realistic efforts to 
reach balanced and verifiable agreements with the Soviet Union on arms control 
and disarmament. 
We have substantially increased our defence expenditure in real terms. We have 
honoured our promise to give our regular and reserve forces proper pay and 
conditions and the equipment they need to do the job. 
There could be no greater testimony to the professional dedication and the 
quality of equipment of the British Armed Services than the brilliant recapture 
of the Falkland Islands in just 74 days. We take pride in their achievement. 
Civil Defence 
Our overriding desire and policy is to go on preserving peace. 
However, no responsible government can simply assume that we shall never be 
attacked. To plan for civil defence is a humanitarian duty - not only against 
the possibility of nuclear. but also of conventional attack. 
That is why we must take steps to provide the help that could be vital for 
millions. To proclaim a nuclear-free zone, as some Labour councils have, is a 
delusion. 
The Conservative Government has accordingly carried out a thorough review of 
civil defence, brought forward new regulations to require local authorities to 
provide improved protection, strengthened the UK Warning and Monitoring 
Organisations, and nearly doubled spending on civil defence. 
We propose to amend the Civil Defence Act 1948 to enable civil defence funds to 
be used in safeguarding against peacetime emergencies as well as against hostile 
attacks. 
Britain in Europe 
The creation of the European Community has been vital in cementing lasting peace 
in Europe and ending centuries of hostility. We came to office determined to 
make a success of British membership of the Community. This we have done. 
Our first priority in 1979 was to cut our financial contribution to the 
Community Budget to a fairer level. Labour made a song and dance about 
renegotiating the terms, but had achieved nothing. The bill to British taxpayers 
soared. 
We have stood up for Britain's interests, and substantially reduced our net 
contribution to the Community Budget. We have tenaciously sought a permanent 
alternative to the annual wrangles about refunds. Until we secure a lasting 
solution, we shall make sure of proper interim safeguards for this country. 
Meanwhile, with the help of Conservatives in the European Parliament, we shall 
continue to try to shift the Community's spending priorities away from 
agriculture and towards industrial, regional and other policies which help 
Britain more. 
We shall continue both to oppose petty acts of Brussels bureaucracy and to seek 
the removal of unnecessary restrictions on the free movement of goods and 
services between member states, with proper safeguards to guarantee fair 
competition. 
The Labour Party wants Britain to withdraw from the Community, because it fears 
that Britain cannot compete inside and that it would be easier to build a 
Socialist siege economy if we withdrew. The Liberals and the SDP appear to want 
Britain to stay in but never to upset our partners by speaking up forcefully. 
The Conservatives reject both extreme views. 
The European Community is the world's largest trading group. It is by far our 
most important export market. Withdrawal would be a catastrophe for this 
country. As many as two million jobs would be at risk. We would lose the great 
export advantages and the attraction to overseas investors which membership now 
gives us. It would be a fateful step towards isolation, at which only the Soviet 
Union and her allies would rejoice. 
A Trading Nation 
Our most important contribution to a healthy world economy is to manage our own 
affairs successfully. We shall also build on our important role in promoting 
international action to encourage recovery through the IMF and other 
international organisations. With the other leading industrial nations, we shall 
continue with our realistic initiatives to improve currency stability in the 
Western world, and assist nations with excessive debts to regain stability. 
Together with the Community, we are also playing a leading part in preserving an 
open world trading system, while safeguarding our most vulnerable industries. 
While world trade declined last year, our exports and share of world trade 
increased, and we enjoyed a healthy balance of payments surplus, despite the 
pessimists who said the pound was uncompetitive. We believe in reinforcing 
success. This Government has given wholehearted support to British companies 
tendering for major overseas projects, and helped them secure many important 
contracts in the face of the toughest competition. 
We will build on these initiatives to help our exporters, and vigorously promote 
the interests of British trade and industry in international negotiations - 
where we have already made our presence very effectively felt. We have no 
intention of becoming a dumping ground for the goods of other nations. We shall 
continue to challenge other nations' unfair barriers, whether in the shape of 
tariffs or trading practices. 
Our Wider Role 
In a troubled world, Britain is increasingly respected because we stand up for 
our own interests. But we are also respected because we stand up for the cause 
of freedom and the spread of prosperity throughout the world. 
We resisted unprovoked aggression in the Falkland Islands, when the loyal 
support of our friends throughout the world reminded us of our common heritage 
of freedom. We will continue to uphold the principles for which we fought. 
We shall continue to give our full support to the Commonwealth and to play an 
active and constructive part at the United Nations. 
Our generous but carefully controlled aid programme is both an investment in the 
freedom and prosperity of the poorer countries and in a stable and expanding 
world economy. That programme helps us as well as those who receive it, since 
most of it is spent on British goods and services. More than many other nations, 
we direct our aid to the poorest countries, particularly in the Commonwealth. 
But government aid is only a part of the total help we give the developing 
world. Unlike the Labour Party, we believe in permitting a free and profitable 
outflow of British investment. That flow to poorer countries has now grown far 
larger than British Government aid, bringing with it an invaluable transfer of 
skills and technology. 
THE RESOLUTE APPROACH
This Government's approach is straightforward and resolute. We mean what we say. 
We face the truth, even when it is painful. And we stick to our purpose. 
Most decisions worth taking are difficult. Cutting a clear path through the 
jungle of a modern bureaucracy is hard going. The world recession of the past 
four years, and the high level of unemployment throughout the industrial world, 
have made the going harder. 
During these difficult years, we have protected the sick and the elderly. We 
have maintained Britain's defences and her contribution to the Western Alliance. 
And at the same time, we have laid the foundations for a dynamic and prosperous 
future. 
The rewards are beginning to appear. If we continue on our present course with 
courage and commonsense, those rewards should multiply in the next five years. 
We shall never lose sight of the British traditions of fairness and tolerance. 
We are also determined to revive those other British qualities - a genius for 
invention and a spirit of enterprise. 
Under Conservative government, confidence is brushing aside pessimism at home. 
Abroad, Britain is regarded for the first time in years as a country with a 
great future as well as a great past. 
We mean to make that future a reality.

British Conservative Party election manifesto, 1987CONSERVATIVE PARTY: 1987 
The Next Moves Forward



FOREWORD
In the last eight years our country has changed - changed for the better. 
We have discovered a new strength and a new pride. We have fostered a new spirit 
of enterprise. We have risen to fresh challenges at home and abroad. Once again 
our economy is strong. Our industries are flourishing. Unemployment is falling. 
Founded on this new prosperity, we are building a better Health Service and 
providing more care for those in need. Living standards are higher than ever 
before. Our people have the protection of a stronger defence and more police. 
Britain has come right by her own efforts. We trusted in the character and 
talents of our people. The British instinct is for choice and independence. 
Given the opportunities provided by Conservative policies, many more families 
now enjoy the pride of ownership of homes, of shares and of pensions. 
Together we are building One Nation of free, prosperous and responsible families 
and people. A Conservative dream is at last becoming a reality. 
This Manifesto points the way forward.
MARGARET THATCHER 



THE BRITISH REVIVAL
This manifesto sets out our vision for the Britain of the 1990s and beyond, a 
future based on the aspirations of millions of individuals and their families 
their hopes, their needs, their security. For the first time in a generation 
this country looks forward to an era of real prosperity and fulfilment. 
A vast change separates the Britain of today from the Britain of the late 1970s. 
Is it really only such a short time ago that inflation rose to an annual rate of 
27 per cent? That the leader of the Transport and General Workers' Union was 
widely seen as the most powerful man in the land? That a minority Labour 
Government, staggering from crisis to crisis on borrowed money, was nonetheless 
maintained in power by the Liberal Party in return for the paper concession of a 
Lib-Lab pact? And that Labour's much-vaunted pay pact with the unions collapsed 
in the industrial anarchy of the "winter of discontent", n which the dead went 
unburied, rubbish piled up in the streets and the country was gripped by a 
creeping paralysis which Labour was powerless to cure? 
It seems in retrospect to be the history of another country. Yet these things 
happened and people had to accept them as an unavoidable part of everyday life. 
Reversing the Decline 
Remember the conventional wisdom of the day. The British people were 
"ungovernable". We were in the grip of an incurable "British disease". Britain 
was heading for "irreversible decline". 
Well, the people were not ungovernable, the disease was not incurable, the 
decline has been reversed. 
  Britain today is in the seventh successive year of steady economic growth. We 
  have moved from the bottom to the top of the growth league of major European 
  countries. 
  In Britain today. inflation has reached its lowest levels for almost twenty 
  years. 
  In Britain today, the number of strikes has dropped to the lowest levels for 
  50 years. 
  In Britain today. far from being in debt to the IMF, we have built up our net 
  overseas assets to their highest level since the Second World War - higher 
  than France, Germany and the United States, second only to Japan. 
  In Britain today. living standards are higher than ever before in our history. 

But these are bald statistics. What matters is the feel of the country - the new 
enthusiasm for enterprise, the new spirit that Britain can make it, that we can 
prosper with the best. Investment in British industry is rising strongly. Our 
services sector, employing almost two-thirds of our workforce, generates a vast 
surplus of foreign earnings. And our manufacturers are travelling the globe with 
a new confidence born of the knowledge that Britain is internationally 
competitive again. 
The World Stage 
This national revival is not confined to increased economic strength. Britain is 
also playing a major part on the international stage. From the White House 
through Europe to the Kremlin our voice is heard on arms control, on East-West 
issues, on human rights, on the Middle East and on African affairs. 
With the Conservative Government, Britain has played a strong and responsible 
role internationally. We have defended civilised values by fighting terrorism 
relentlessly. We have secured our national interests, as when we liberated the 
Falklands. We have been ready to settle long-standing issues like Hong Kong 
where we reached an agreement to safeguard the way of life of the people. 
Time and again we have shown that we possess the essential requirements of 
successful diplomacy: we stand firm on principles yet are ready to negotiate and 
prepared to take decisive action. 
Founded in Strength 
The ability to act internationally does not come without effort. It must be 
founded on a strong economy and a robust defence. This Government took the 
necessary steps to build up both. Success has followed. 
  Prudent financial policies have made Britain one of the world's largest 
  creditors. Today we are able to shape world efforts to sustain trade and 
  promote international monetary co-operation. 
  We gave a lead in NATO and installed Cruise missiles. Today, as a result, the 
  Soviet Union is at last prepared to negotiate to remove its own missiles 
  targeted against us. 
  This Government is modernising our own independent deterrent. Today Britain 
  retains an independent influence in arms control negotiations between the 
  superpowers. 
By such steadfastness, we have not only rebuilt our economy and re-established 
our world reputation; we have also regained our national self-respect. But 
restoring a country's greatness is not easy. The new Conservative policies met 
bitter resistance every step of the way. 
Remember: 
The year-long coal strike, with its violence and intimidation on a massive 
scale. It failed and mining productivity has since soared. 
The battle we had to fight to ensure that Britain paid no more than its fair 
share of the European Community Budget. We now get automatic rebates - this 
year, over £1.3 billion. 
The doubling of the oil price which confronted the new Government with a 
world-wide recession - and, more recently, an equally dramatic fall in the oil 
price which halved government oil revenues and in earlier times would have 
threatened a collapse of confidence in the pound. Both these oil "shocks" were 
successfully withstood by prudent policies wl1ich have produced a sustained 
growth of prosperity. 
And let us not forget the challenge of the Falklands War. 
How many of the alternative governments on offer would have stood firm, 
overcome, or even survived such difficulties? Does anyone suppose that the 
Labour Party would have resisted, let alone defeated, the violence and 
intimidation in the coal strike? Or that the Liberals or the Social Democrats 
would have fought so hard for our rebate from the Europ6an Community? Or that 
any of the Opposition parties would have persevered through all these 
difficulties to break the back of inflation and restore honest money? 
A Strong and Stable Government 
How has it been done? All these improvements in the wealth and standing of our 
country have only been possible because we have had a strong government with 
sound policies and a decisive majority in Parliament. A weak government with 
uncertain policies would not have known how to withstand the pressures upon it; 
a government without a good overall majority in Parliament would not have been 
allowed to do so; and a strong government with unso1ind policies would have been 
a positive force for disaster. 
In this election, only the Conservative Party is offering strong, decisive and 
united government. 
The Next Moves Forward 
The next Conservative Government will build on the achievements of the past 
eight years with a full programme of positive reform. 
We will continue: 
  to pursue policies of sound financial management, the conquest of inflation, 
  the promotion of enterprise and the growth of employment; 
  to spread the ownership of homes, shares, pensions and savings ever more 
  widely to give families greater financial independence; 
  to give people greater choice and responsibility over their own lives in 
  important areas such as housing and education; 
  to improve the well-being of the people through better health care, and to 
  safeguard the living standards of those who have to depend on the community; 
  to improve the quality of life by conserving the best of our heritage and our 
  countryside, and by fostering provision for the arts and sport; 
  to exercise strong leadership where government needs to be strong in 
  protecting the nation against potential aggression and the citizen against 
  lawlessness. 
We intend to press on with the radical Conservative reform which we embarked 
upon in 1979, and which has already revived the spirit of our people and 
restored the reputation of our country. 
WIDER OWNERSHIP AND GREATER OPPORTUNITY
Conservatives aim to extend as widely as possible the opportunity to own 
property and build up capital, to exercise real choice in education, and to 
develop economic independence and security. 
Our goal is a capital-owning democracy of people and families who exercise power 
over their own lives n the most direct way. They would take the important 
decisions - as tenants, home-owners, parents, employees, and trade unionists 
rather than having them taken for them. 
Of course, it is not possible to give people independence. That is something we 
must all achieve by our own efforts. But what this Conservative Government has 
done is to make it easier for people to acquire independence for themselves: 
  by introducing the right to buy council houses; 
  by returning nationalised industries to the people in ways that encourage the 
  widest possible spread of ownership; 
  by making it easier to buy shares in British industry through employee share 
  schemes and Personal Equity Plans. 
These opportunities - all too often introduced n the teeth of fierce resistance 
from the Opposition parties - have achieved spectacular results. There has been 
a surge of home- ownership, share-ownership and self-reliance. 
And because these first-time shareholders and home-owners are more independent, 
they develop a more independent outlook. They are no longer content that some of 
the most important decisions in their lives what school their children attend, 
for example, or whether or not to go on strike should be taken by officialdom or 
trade union bosses. People want to decide such things for themselves. 
In this way the scope of individual responsibility is widened, the family is 
strengthened, and voluntary bodies flourish. State power is checked and 
opportunities are spread throughout society. Ownership and independence cease to 
be the privileges of a few and become the birthright of all. 
In this way One Nation is finally reached not by a single people being 
conscripted into an organised socialist programme but by millions of people 
building their own lives in their own way. 
Better Housing for All
HOME OWNERSHIP 
Nowhere has the spread of ownership been more significant than in housing. 
Buying their own home is the first step most people take towards building up 
capital to hand down to their children and grandchildren. It gives people a 
stake in society - something to conserve. It is the foundation stone of a 
capital-owning democracy. 
A home should be a source of pride and independence to the family living in it, 
regardless of whether it is owned or rented. We will ensure that every family in 
the land has the opportunity to make it so. 
Home-ownership has been the great success story of housing policy in the last 
eight years. One million council tenants have become home-owners and another one 
and a half million more families have become home-owners for the first time. 
Two out of every three homes are now owned by the people who live in them. This 
is a very high proportion, one of the largest in the world. We are determined to 
make it larger still. 
Some people are still deterred by the costs and complications of house purchase. 
That is why we must look for new ways to make house-buying simpler and easier. 
Our abolition of the conveyancing monopoly has already made it cheaper. 
We will keep the present system of mortgage tax relief. 
We will target improvement grants to where they are most needed - to the least 
well- off. To meet the special needs of old people, we will ensure that all 
local authorities have powers to give improvement grants, where necessary, for 
properties where elderly people move in with relatives. We will extend the 30 
per cent housing association grant to help schemes for old people. 
A RIGHT TO RENT 
Most problems in housing now arise in the rented sector. Controls, although 
well-meant, have dramatically reduced the private rented accommodation to a mere 
8 per cent of the housing market. 
This restricts housing choice and hinders the economy. People looking for work 
cannot easily move to a different area to do so. Those who find work may not be 
able to find rented accommodation nearby. Those who would prefer to rent rather 
than buy are forced to become reluctant owner-occupiers or to swell the queue 
for council houses. Some may even become temporarily homeless. 
And it is not only these people and their families who suffer from the shortage 
of homes for rent. The economy as a whole is damaged when workers cannot move to 
fill jobs because there are no homes to rent in the neighbourhood. 
This must be remedied. We have already taken some modest steps in this direction 
by making it easier to part-own and part-rent homes through shared ownership; by 
bringing in and widening the scheme for assured tenancies; by our system of 
shortholds; and by providing a new 30 per cent housing association grant to 
build hostels for young workers. We have also directly tackled the problem of 
homelessness through new grants to housing associations and other measures. 
More must now be done. The next Conservative Government, having already 
implemented the right to buy, will increase practical opportunities to rent. 
We must attract new private investment into rented housing - both from large 
institutions such as building societies and housing associations as well as from 
small private landlords. To do this we intend, in particular, to build on two 
initiatives we have already taken, 
First, to encourage more investment by institutions, we will extend the system 
of assured tenancies. This will permit new lettings in which rents and the 
period of lease will be freely agreed between tenants and landlords. The tenant 
will have security of tenure and will renegotiate the rent at the end of the 
lease, with provision for arbitration if necessary. 
Second, to encourage new lettings by smaller landlords, we will develop the 
system of shorthold. The rents of landlords will be limited to a reasonable rate 
of return, and the tenant's security of tenure will be limited to the term of 
the lease, which would be not less than 6 months. This will bring back into use 
many of the 550,000 private dwellings which now stand empty because of controls, 
as well as making the provision of new rented housing a more attractive 
investment. 
And we will revise the housing benefit system to ensure that it prevents 
landlords from increasing rents to unreasonable levels at the taxpayer's 
expense. 
All existing private and housing association tenants will continue to have their 
present protection in respect of rents and security of tenure. 
We will strengthen the law against harassment and unlawful eviction. 
RIGHTS FOR COUNCIL TENANTS 
Many council estates built in the sixties and seventies are badly designed, 
vulnerable to crime and vandalism and in bad repair. In many areas, rent arrears 
are high. In all, over 110,000 council dwellings stand empty. Yet it is often 
difficult for tenants to move. If they are ever to enjoy the prospect of 
independence, municipal monopoly must be replaced by choice in renting. 
We will give groups of tenants the right to form tenant co-operatives, owning 
and running their management and budget for themselves. They will also have the 
right to ask other institutions to take over their housing. Tenants who wish to 
remain with the local authority will be able to do so. 
We will give each council house tenant individually the right to transfer the 
ownership of his or her house to a housing association or other independent, 
approved landlord. 
In some areas more may be necessary. The success of Estate Action and Housing 
Action Areas shows how a carefully targeted approach can transform an area of 
poor housing and give people there new hope. Our Urban Development Corporations 
have been successful in restoring derelict industrial areas. We believe that a 
similar approach could be adopted for housing in some places. We will take 
powers to create Housing Action Trusts initially as a pilot scheme to take over 
such housing, renovate it, and pass it on to different tenures and ownerships 
including housing associations, tenant co-operatives, owner-occupiers or 
approved private landlords. 
We will reform the structure of local authority housing accounts so that public 
funds are directed at the problems of repair and renovation; maintenance and 
management are improved; resources are directed to the areas where the problems 
are greatest; rent arrears are reduced; and fewer houses are left empty. 
Housing is the biggest single investment that most people make - whether in 
money or in time, skill and effort. In the last eight years, as a result of our 
policies, we have seen a dramatic increase in home-ownership. In the next five 
years, we will complement that with policies designed to improve the supply and 
condition of the rented housing stock. 
A Capital-Owning Democracy
SHARE OWNERSHIP 
Home-ownership leads naturally to other forms of financial provision for the 
future - notably to pensions and share-ownership. Half of the working population 
are in occupational pension schemes, but in 1979 only seven per cent of the 
population held shares. 
People were deterred by the sheer unfamiliarity of owning shares. Young people 
were reluctant to save for a retirement which seemed far away. And most tax 
incentives encouraged saving through institutions rather than directly. 
With a Conservative Government, all that has been changing. We were determined 
to make share-ownership available to the whole nation. Just as with cars, 
television sets, washing machines and foreign holidays, it would no longer be a 
privilege of the few; it would become the expectation of the many. We achieved 
this historic transformation in three ways: 
First, we introduced major tax incentives for employee share-ownership. Seven 
out of the last eight budgets have included measures to encourage people to 
purchase shares in the company in which they work. 
Second, starting this year, we brought in Personal Equity Plans, which enable 
people to invest in British industry entirely free of tax. 
Third, we embarked on a major programme of privatisation, insisting that small 
investors and employees of the privatised companies should have a fair chance to 
join in the buying. 
The results have been dramatic, and the direct consequence of government policy. 
Share ownership has trebled. Almost one in five of the adult population now own 
shares directly. And the figure will continue to rise. Of this total, the 
majority are first-time shareholders and most of them own shares in either 
privatised companies or the TSB group. One-and-a-half million people hold shares 
in the companies where they work. 
After eight years of Conservative Government, Britain is now at the forefront of 
a world wide revolution in extending ownership. One in every five British adults 
now owns shares compared to one in ten Frenchmen and one in twenty Japanese. 
Only the Americans, where a quarter of the people are shareholders, remain ahead 
- and the gap is narrowing. 
This is the first stage of a profound and progressive social transformation - 
popular capitalism. Owning a direct stake in industry not only enhances personal 
independence; it also gives a heightened sense of involvement and pride in 
British business. More realistic attitudes to profit and investment take root. 
And the foundations of British economic achievement are further strengthened. 
We will press on with the encouragement of popular capitalism. 
In the next Parliament: 
  We will continue to extend share-ownership as we have done with 
  home-ownership. 
  We will reintroduce our proposed tax incentives for profit-related pay. 
  We will privatise more state industries in ways that increase share-ownership, 
  both for the employees and for the public at large. 
Raising Standards in Education
Parents want schools to provide their children with the knowledge, training and 
character that will fit them for today's world. They want them to be taught 
basic educational skills, They want schools that will encourage moral values: 
honesty, hard work and responsibility. And they should have the right to choose 
those schools which do these things for their children. 
RAISING STANDARDS IN OUR SCHOOLS 
How can all this best be done? Resources obviously matter. This Government has 
provided more resources for pupils than ever before. 
With the Conservatives: 
  Spending per primary pupil has risen by 17 per cent after allowing for 
  inflation and per secondary pupil by 20 per cent under our Government. 
  There are more teachers in proportion to pupils than ever before. 
  British schools are world leaders in the use of computers in the classroom. 
But money alone is not enough. Increased resources have not produced uniformly 
higher standards. Parents and employers are rightly concerned that not enough 
children master the basic skills, that some of what is taught seems irrelevant 
to a good education and that standards of personal discipline and aspirations 
are too low. In certain cases education is used for political indoctrination and 
sexual propaganda. The time has now come for school reform. 
FOUR MAJOR REFORMS 
First, we will establish a National Core Curriculum. 
It is vital to ensure that all pupils between the ages of 5 to 16 study a basic 
range of subjects - including maths, English and science. In each of these basic 
subjects syllabuses will be published and attainment levels set so that the 
progress of pupils can be assessed at around ages 7, 11 and 14, and in 
preparation for the GCSE at 16. Parents, teachers and pupils will then know how 
well each child is doing. We will consult widely among those concerned n 
establishing the curriculum. 
Second, within five years governing bodies and head teachers of all secondary 
schools and many primary schools will be given control over their own budgets. 
They know best the needs of their school. With this independence they will 
manage their resources and decide their priorities, covering the cost of books, 
equipment, maintenance and staff. Several pilot schemes for financial devolution 
to schools have already proved their worth, such as those in Cambridgeshire and 
Solihull. 
Third, we will increase parental choice. 
The most consistent pressure for high standard in schools comes from parents. 
They have a powerful incentive to ensure that their children receive a good 
education. We have already done much through the 1980 and 1986 Education Acts so 
that parents can make their voice heard. But parents still need better 
opportunities to send their children to the school of their choice. That would 
be the best guarantee of higher standards. To achieve this: 
We will ensure that Local Education Authorities (LEAs) set school budgets in 
line with the number of pupils who will be attending each school. 
Schools will be required to enrol children up to the school's physical capacity 
instead of artificially restricting pupil numbers, as can happen today. Popular 
schools, which have earned parental support by offering good education, will 
then be able to expand beyond present pupil numbers. 
These steps will compel schools to respond to the views of parents. But there 
must also be variety of educational provision so that parents can better compare 
one school with another. 
We will therefore support the co-existence of a variety of schools - 
comprehensive, grammar, secondary modern, voluntary controlled and aided, 
independent, sixth form and tertiary colleges as well as the reasonable rights 
of schools to retain their sixth forms, all of which will give parents greater 
choice and lead to higher standards. 
We will establish a pilot network of City Technology Colleges. Already two have 
been announced and support for more has been pledged by industrial sponsors. 
We will expand the Assisted Places Scheme to 35,000. This highly successful 
scheme has enabled 25,000 talented children from less-well-off backgrounds to 
gain places at the 230 independent schools currently in the scheme. 
We will continue to defend the right to independent education as part of a free 
society. It is under threat from all the other parties. 
Fourth, we will allow state schools to opt out of LEA control. 
If, in a particular school, parents and governing bodies wish to become 
independent of the LEA, they will be given the choice to do so. Those schools 
which opt out of LEA control will receive a full grant direct from the 
Department of Education and Science. They would become independent charitable 
trusts. 
In the area covered by the Inner London Education Authority, where entire 
borough councils wish to become independent of the LEA, they will be able to 
submit proposals to the Secretary of State requesting permission to take over 
the provision of education within their boundaries. 
VILLAGE SCHOOLS 
We recognise the important contribution made by small rural primary schools to 
education and to the community life of our villages. We will ensure, therefore, 
that the future of these schools is judged by wider factors than merely the 
number of pupils attending them. 
PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION 
Eighty per cent of all three- and four-year-olds in this country attend nursery 
classes, reception classes or playgroups. Formal nursery education is not 
necessarily the most appropriate experience for children. Diversity of provision 
is desirable. LEAs should look to support the voluntary sector alongside their 
own provision. 
A BETTER CAREER FOR TEACHERS 
We recognise the importance of teachers and wish to enhance their professional 
status. The Government has provided a record amount of money to increase their 
pay by an average 16.4 per cent this year 25 per cent over 18 months. Our new 
pay award will encourage able young people to enter the career of teaching and 
reward the many good teachers already in the profession. 
The Burnham negotiating machinery finally broke down and has been temporarily 
replaced by an Interim Advisory Committee. The Government wants an effective and 
permanent machinery for settling teachers' pay, in which the interests of all 
parties will be recognised. 
The Government will produce a Green Paper setting out the various alternatives 
and will enter into wide consultations with a view to establishing a new and 
effective machinery. 
Higher and Further Education
The British system of higher education is among the best in the world. It ranges 
from universities to further education colleges providing skills and 
qualifications. We recognise the value of research and scholarship for their own 
sake. At the same time we must meet the nation's demand for highly qualified 
manpower to compete in international markets. 
Building on our achievements since 1979 - 157,000 more full-time and part-time 
students we want to expand higher education opportunities still further. By 
1990, we plan to increase student numbers by a further 50,000, and to raise the 
proportion of 18-year-olds in higher education. 
We will replace the University Grants Committee with an independent statutory 
body on the lines recommended by the Croham Committee. The new body will be 
called the Universities Funding Council (UFC) and will have broadly equal 
numbers of academic and non-academic members with a chairman who has substantial 
experience outside the academic world. The primary responsibility of the UFC 
will be the allocation of funds to individual universities under new contractual 
arrangements. 
Polytechnics are today strong, successful and mature institutions. They are 
complementary to the universities. Their present structure, under local 
authorities, is inappropriate for an expanding national role. 
As part of our policy to delegate power and responsibility, we will legislate to 
convert the polytechnics and other mainly higher education colleges in England 
to free-standing corporate bodies under boards of governors. 
We will set up a new Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council independent of 
central Government, in place of local authority control. 
As part of our aim to widen access to higher education we have begun a review of 
student support which is the most generous in the western world. We need to 
modernise this system which has not changed for 25 years. The purpose of the 
review is to improve the overall prospects of students so that more are 
encouraged to enter higher education. No final conclusions have been reached, 
but we believe that top-up loans to supplement grants are one way, among others, 
of bringing in new finance to help students and relieve pressure on their 
parents. 
We will take care to ensure that the best aspects of the present system are 
retained in any new proposals which we bring forward. 
Trade Unions 
It is not only in relation to government, however, that people's right to choice 
and independence must be safeguarded and extended. Great social institutions can 
sometimes become too powerful and cease to represent their members, denying them 
any control over the decisions taken in their name and even forcing them to act 
against their own interests. That was the case with trade unions before 1979. 
Since then, Conservative reforms have redressed the balance between the 
individual and his union, preventing coercion of the majority by activists and 
militants. These highly successful and popular measures have encouraged 
democracy within the unions, restrained the abuses of secondary action and 
picketing, reversed the growth of closed shops, restored the rights of redress 
against unions acting unlawfully and removed the immunity of unions that call a 
strike without a fair ballot. 
The result has been a transformation of shopfloor relations, allowing management 
and workforce to co-operate to improve working practices and introduce new 
technology to mutual gain. In the next Parliament we will protect the rights of 
individual trade union members. 
We will introduce legislation to: 
  empower individual members to stop their unions calling them out on strike 
  without first holding a secret ballot of members; 
  protect individual members from disciplinary action if they refuse to join a 
  strike they disagree with; 
  ensure that all members of trade union governing bodies are elected by secret 
  ballot at least once every five years; 
  make independently supervised postal ballots compulsory for such elections; 
  limit further the abuse of the closed shop by providing protection against 
  unfair dismissal for all non-union employees, and removing any legal immunity 
  from industrial action to establish or enforce a closed shop; 
  provide new safeguards on the use of union funds; 
  establish a new trade union commissioner with the power to help individual 
  trade unionists to enforce their fundamental rights. 
BUILDING PROSPERITY AND EMPLOYMENT
Since this Government took office in 1979, we have restored honest money and 
established a stable economic framework in which business can flourish. We have 
been careful not to spend money before we earned it. We have brought the nation 
back to living within its means. We have massively rebuilt our international 
assets. We have refused to be drawn into an auction of pledges for higher 
spending that the country simply could not afford. We have balanced the books. 
We have paid our way. 
The results have been dramatic. 
  Despite the coal strike and the collapse of the oil price, Britain has moved 
  from being bottom to the top of the growth league of major European countries. 

  Inflation has reached its lowest levels for almost 20 years. 
  The basic rate of income tax has been cut from 33p to 27p, four taxes have 
  been abolished, and almost a million and a half people have been taken out of 
  income tax altogether. 
  Over a million extra jobs have been created since 1983 more than in the rest 
  of the European Community put together. 
  Unemployment, a problem throughout Europe, is now firmly on a downward trend - 
  with youth unemployment in this country below the European average. 
  We have rebuilt our net overseas assets to some £110 billion from a mere £12 
  billion when we first took office. This will provide substantial foreign 
  earnings in the years ahead and a cushion, should oil revenues fall. 
While the Opposition parties cling to the failed policies of the past, our 
strategy has become widely accepted abroad. Socialist Spain as well as Christian 
Democratic Germany, Social Democratic Sweden as well as France, Labour New 
Zealand and Conservative Canada, all accept that governments must reduce their 
borrowing, curb state spending, reduce taxation, privatise state firms and do 
away with unnecessary controls. What we began in 1979 is today common 
international practice. 
Stable Prices 
Our greatest economic challenge on entering office was to defeat inflation. 
Rampant inflation under the Labour Government, when money lost a quarter of its 
value in a single year, had reduced our economy to "the sick man of Europe". 
Nothing erodes a country's competitive edge faster than inflation. Nothing so 
undermines personal thrift and independence as to see the value of a lifetime's 
savings eaten away in retirement through spiralling prices. And nothing 
threatens the social fabric of a nation more than the conflicts and divisiveness 
which inflation creates. 
Our success in the battle against inflation has been the key to Britain's 
economic revival. It required firm control of public expenditure, a substantial 
reduction in government borrowing, curbing the growth of money in circulation, 
maintaining financial discipline, stimulating competition and moderating trade 
union power. 
The Opposition parties opposed nearly every aspect of this strategy. If even 
some of their policies were implemented today, higher borrowing and higher 
spending would once again unleash inflation. 
There is no better yardstick of a party's fitness to govern that its attitude to 
inflation. Nothing is so politically immoral as a party that ignores that 
yardstick. 
The Conservative Government will continue to put the conquest of inflation as 
our first objective. We will not be content until we have stable prices, with 
inflation eradicated altogether. 
Lower Taxes 
We are the only Party that believes in lower taxation. 
As the Party determined to achieve growing prosperity we recognise that it is 
people who create wealth, not governments. Lower taxation coupled with lower 
inflation makes everyone better off. It encourages people to work harder, to be 
inventive and to take risks. It promotes a climate of enterprise and initiative. 

Lower tax on earnings enables people to build up savings to give them financial 
security in later life. 
Lower taxation, by increasing take-home pay without adding to industry's costs, 
improves competitiveness and helps with jobs. And tax relief for charitable 
donations encourages more people to give and to give more generously. 
There is a strong moral case for reducing taxation. High taxes deprive people of 
their independence and make their choices for them. The desire to do better for 
one's family is one of the strongest motives in human nature. As a party 
committed to the family and opposed to the over-powerful State, we want people 
to keep more of what they earn, and to have more freedom of choice about what 
they do for themselves, their families and for others less fortunate. 
Governments should trust people to spend their own money sensibly and decently; 
high taxation prevents them doing so. 
That is why we have: 
  cut the basic rate of tax from 33p to 27p in the £, and increased the personal 
  allowances (the starting point for paying tax) by 22 per cent more than 
  inflation.
  If Labour's tax regime were still in force, the family man on average earnings 
  would today be paying more than £500 per year in extra income tax: a 
  headmaster married to a nurse would be paying more than £1,300 extra; 
  reduced sharply the absurd top rates of tax inherited from Labour which were 
  causing so many of our most talented people to work abroad; 
  increased greatly the tax relief for charitable donations. Giving to charities 
  has doubled since we first took office; 
  abolished four taxes completely: the national insurance surcharge - the tax 
  which Labour put on jobs - the investment income surcharge, the development 
  land tax and the lifetime gifts tax; 
  reformed and simplified corporation tax, and cut its rate to the lowest of any 
  major industrial country; 
  cut the small business corporation tax rate by more than a third, and extended 
  it to many more small businesses; 
  reformed and reduced capital taxes as well as slashing stamp duty. 
In every case where taxes have been reformed and reduced there has been an 
increase in the amount of tax collected. 
Labour totally fail to understand the benefits this brings to everyone. Today 
they openly threaten to raise taxation. To fulfil their plans, they would have 
to raise taxes substantially. Indeed, all the Opposition parties Labour, 
Liberals and SDP - would raise taxation. We believe that it is precisely the 
wrong thing to do. 
It will be our aim to do the opposite. 
In the next Parliament: 
  We aim to reduce the burden of taxation. 
  In particular, we will cut income tax still further and reduce the basic rate 
  to 25p in the £ as soon as we prudently can. 
  We will continue the process of tax reform. 
Spending We Can Afford 
Over the past eight years we have managed the nation's finances with care. Even 
allowing for inflation, this has enabled us to spend substantially more on the 
Health Service (up by 31 per cent), defence (up by 23 per cent), roads (up by 17 
per cent), education per pupil (up by 18 per cent), the police and the battle 
against crime (up by 47 per cent), the disabled and long-term sick (up by 72 per 
cent), and government training schemes (up by 120 per cent). 
How have we been able to do this without running into the financial crises which 
Labour's spending policies invariably set off? 
First, we have been prudent with the nation's money. We have slashed public 
borrowing and sought savings in government expenditure wherever they could 
sensibly be found. 
Second, we are engaged in steadily reducing the share of the nation's income 
taken by the State. This means that more will be left for families and for 
business to invest - the only safe route to higher growth in the economy. 
Third, we have constantly improved the efficiency of the public services, 
ensuring that we get more value for every pound spent. 
For the next Parliament: 
  Our aim is to ensure that public expenditure takes a steadily smaller share of 
  our national income. 
  Within that objective, we will continue to spend more on our priorities. We 
  have set out our plans for further increased spending in these areas over the 
  next three years. 
CREATING NEW JOBS 
High unemployment is one of the most intractable problems facing all Western 
industrialised countries. 
We understand the anxiety and stress which unemployment can cause. For almost a 
year unemployment in the United Kingdom has fallen faster than among any of our 
major competitors in Europe, and faster than at any time since 1973. It is 
falling because of the growth and enterprise we have achieved, assisted by the 
employment and training programmes we have developed. 
Since we were last re-elected in 1983, the number of jobs has risen by over 1 
million more than in the rest of the European Community put together. This 
Government has established the conditions in which business can prosper and 
create new jobs. This has not just been achieved through the revitalisation of 
traditional industries. We have encouraged growth in those crucial areas of new 
enterprise which provide the foundation for the jobs of the future - 
self-employment, small firms, the creation of new enterprise, the expanding 
service sector - particularly tourism and leisure - and new technology. 
Self-employment is the seedcorn of the new enterprises of tomorrow. Without 
sufficient people to start new businesses, the future of our whole economy is in 
jeopardy. Today we have the highest number of self-employed for over 60 years. 
One worker in ten is now his own boss - or her own boss, since a quarter of the 
self-employed are women. Indeed, the eighties have seen almost three-quarters of 
a million people become self-employed. More and more of our young people today 
seek self-employment as a worthwhile career. It is particularly encouraging that 
almost half the growth in self-employment since 1983 has been in the northern 
part of our country. 
Small firms, along with all businesses, have benefited from our management of 
the economy. Since this Government took office, the number of registered 
businesses has shown a net increase of more than 500 a week - and the number has 
increased in every region of the country. 
Helping Unemployed People into Jobs 
As well as creating a climate in which business could employ more people, we 
have developed programmes to help those out of work. 
The Youth Training Scheme (YTS) caters for school-leavers aged 16 and 1 7 who 
wish to participate in training and work experience. Every trainee is given the 
opportunity of working towards a recognised qualification. 
The new Job Training Scheme (JTS), which started in April this year, will offer 
a chance to any person over 18 who has been unemployed for six months or more, 
who wants to work and train with an employer for a recognised qualification. 
This year it will help nearly a quarter of a million people. 
Under our Community Programme, each year over 300,000 people who have been out 
of work for some time gain valuable experience working on community projects. 
They have a reference to show potential employers. 
We will improve the Community Programme to make it full-time and better able to 
help those with families. We shall pay those working on the programme an 
allowance giving a premium over and above their social security payments. 
Under the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, 230,000 unemployed people have started to 
work for themselves. Many of them have now become employers themselves. 
JobClubs were first opened in 1985 to help the unemployed help themselves back 
into jobs. Over 1,000 have been established. At present two-thirds of those 
leaving JobClubs go into employment. 
The JobClubs programme has been a great success. We aim to expand it. 
Our economic success means that we can now do more to help those out of work. 
Although youth unemployment has declined in the last year it still remains a 
problem. Far too many of our youngsters leave school with an education that has 
failed to prepare them for the world of work. At the same time, by maintaining 
high starting wages comparable to those of fully trained craftsmen, trade unions 
have kept many of them out of work. 
In 1983 we introduced the first Youth Training Scheme. It is now a national 
two-year programme aimed at giving young people qualifications for work. 
THE FIRST GUARANTEE 
We will now guarantee a place on the Youth Training Scheme to every 
school-leaver under 18 who is not going directly into a job. 
As a result, none of these school-leavers need be unemployed. They can remain at 
school, move to college, get a job, or receive a guaranteed training. YTS will 
serve as a bridge between school and work. 
We will take steps to ensure that those under 18 who deliberately choose to 
remain unemployed are not eligible for benefit. We will of course continue to 
protect other young people, such as those who suffer from disabilities. 
THE SECOND GUARANTEE 
There are still too many young people without the right qualifications for 
employment in today's world. 
Within a year we aim to guarantee a place, either on the Job Training Scheme or 
on the Enterprise Allowance Scheme or in a JobClub, for everyone aged between 1 
8 and 25 years who has been unemployed for between six and twelve months. 
THE THIRD GUARANTEE 
In addition to these major programmes we have taken one further important step. 
Restart is a programme we have set up for interviewing and counselling the 
long-term unemployed to help them into a job or training. Everyone who has been 
unemployed for more than one year has already been given an interview. 
We will guarantee to provide the Restart service in the future at six-monthly 
intervals, to all those who have been unemployed for more than six months. 
Over the next five years we will aim, through the Restart interviews, to offer 
everyone who is under 50, and who has been unemployed for more than two years, a 
place in the Job Training Scheme or in the new Community Programme, in a JobClub 
or in the Enterprise Allowance Scheme. 
REGIONAL ASSISTANCE 
Money spent on earlier programmes attracting firms to regions has sometimes 
created very few jobs. Our new system of regional assistance, introduced in 
1984, ensures that aid is directly targeted towards the creation of new jobs. 
New activities in the service sector from which so many of the new jobs come 
have also been made eligible for assistance. Under the new policy, offers of 
assistance have already been made which should secure almost 300,000 jobs. We 
will continue to ensure that assistance is directed where it is most needed. 
The Employment and Training Services
We will take further steps to provide a comprehensive service to the unemployed. 
We will consult the Manpower Services Commission about transferring JobCentres 
to the Department of Employment so that they can work more closely with 
Unemployment Benefit Offices. 
The Manpower Services Commission would then become primarily a training agency. 
It is employers who are best equipped to assess their training needs. 
We will increase employer representation on the Commission and its advisory 
bodies. 
More jobs are being created by business and industry. Nothing would destroy 
whole industries more effectively than a return to the overmanning and 
restrictive practices of the 1970s. Our policies form a practical and realistic 
approach to help people back into work. We will build on prosperity to create 
more employment. 
A FRAMEWORK FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
British business is in a healthier state than it has been for a generation. 
Output has been rising steadily for six years. Productivity has increased at a 
rate second only to Japan. Company profitability is at its highest for over 
twenty years. Industry has a confidence in the future that would have been 
unthinkable seven years ago. 
Moreover, setting new records has not been confined to the private sector. Since 
1983 productivity in the coal industry has risen by over 50 per cent. British 
Steel has more than doubled its productivity since 1979 and made a profit last 
year for the first time in over ten years. British Rail will cost the taxpayer 
25 per cent less in subsidy this year than n 1983 and without any major route 
closures. 
The Conservative Government has created a framework in which once again 
enterprise can flourish - by cutting red tape, by denationalising state-owned 
companies, by r4moving unnecessary restrictions, by abolishing exchange control, 
by enabling the City of London to become the foremost financial centre in the 
world, by keeping down prices through extending competition, and by ensuring 
access to open trade so that British exporters and consumers can both benefit. 
Privatisation 
Over a third of the companies and industries which used to be owned by the State 
have been returned to free enterprise. Productivity and profitability have 
soared in the newly privatised companies. 
  In 1980 Jaguar made 14,000 cars a year, losing well over £3,000 on each Car 
  sold. Now the company is hard put to keep up with overseas demand and last 
  year sold over 40,00 cars, making a pre-tax profit of over £120m. 
  Since the National Freight Consortium was sold to management and staff in 
  1982, pre-tax profits have increased sevenfold. 
  British Aerospace, Cable & Wireless, Amersham International and Associated 
  British Ports have all strikingly increased their profits. 
It is no mystery why privatisation has succeeded. The overwhelming majority of 
employees have become shareholders in the newly privatised companies. They want 
their companies to succeed. Their companies have been released from the detailed 
controls of Whitehall and given more freedom to manage their own affairs. And 
they have been exposed to the full commercial disciplines of the customer. Even 
former monopolies now face increased competition. 
We will continue the successful programme of privatisation. 
In particular, after the privatisation of the British Airports Authority we will 
return to the public the Water Authorities, leaving certain functions to a new 
National Rivers Authority. 
Following the success of gas privatisation, with the benefits it brought to 
employees and millions of consumers, we will bring forward proposals for 
privatising the electricity industry subject to proper regulation. 
Competition 
Competition forces the economy to respond to the needs of the consumer. It 
promotes efficiency, holds down costs, drives companies to innovate and ensures 
that customers get the best possible value for money. 
Accordingly, this Government has: 
  deregulated long-distance coach services creating over 700 new services with 
  improved quality and lower fares; 
  removed the monopoly on conveyancing of houses in England and Wales; 
  removed the opticians' monopoly, making it easier and cheaper to buy 
  spectacles; 
  relaxed advertising controls on accountants, solicitors, stockbrokers and 
  vets, and permitted greater fee competition for architects and surveyors; 
  increased competition on air routes within the UK and between certain European 
  countries, which has resulted in cheaper fares, a more responsive service and 
  greater choice of carriers for the passenger; 
  deregulated telecommunications, so that customers can now choose between 
  suppliers when buying telephones and private exchanges, and business can 
  choose between two alternative telecommunications networks; 
  suspended the Post Office monopoly of time-sensitive and valuable mail, 
  stimulating a dramatic increase in the number of private courier companies. 
We will continue this approach. 
But competition must be supplemented by legal protection for consumers. Those 
who make their living from their ideas and creations also require protection 
against theft. 
We will introduce further measures to impose tighter controls on pyramid 
selling. 
We will introduce measures to reform the law on copyright, design and 
performance protection. 
The City
The City of London is the world's leading market place in foreign exchange, 
international bank lending and international insurance, It is a major source of 
funds for British companies. The financial services sector as a whole accounts 
for nearly 6 per cent of our national income, generates a net £7 billion per 
year to our balance of payments, and employs over one million people. 
Like other sections of British industry, however, the City was held back by 
restrictive practices until they were swept away in last year's "big bang". This 
has brought nearer the day when shares can be bought and sold over the counter 
in every high street. We have also given building societies greater freedom to 
make a wider range of financial services available to the average family. 
At the same time, the Conservative Government has introduced a legal framework 
to protect investors and consumers: 
  The Companies Acts of 1980 and 1981 strengthened the powers of investigators 
  and increased the courts' power to disqualify directors for misconduct in the 
  City as elsewhere. 
  The Insolvency Act of 1985 made it easier to disqualify directors who had been 
  guilty of unlawful trading. 
  And now the Financial Services Act of 1986 provides the first comprehensive 
  system of investor protection we have had in this country. It also contains 
  stringent new powers to investigate insider dealing which was first made a 
  criminal offence by the Conservative Government in 1980. 
The Conservative Party is the party of law and order. That applies just as much 
to City fraud as to street crime. 
Parliament has just approved our proposals for establishing a Serious Fraud 
Office to improve the work of investigating and prosecuting the worst cases of 
fraud and for streamlining court procedure. After the election we will 
reintroduce our proposals to reform the outdated rules on evidence, as 
recommended by the Roskill Committee. 
Trade 
Britain exports 30 per cent of all that it produces. If this country is to 
remain a key trading nation, industry must remain competitive. That is one 
reason why the Conservative Government attaches great value to maintaining an 
open multinational trading system. Another is that increased trade is a major 
way of encouraging growth and prosperity in the Third World. There is little 
point in demanding more aid for these countries and then refusing them the 
opportunity to trade. 
We will continue to fight for free and fair trade in international negotiations 
and resist the growth of protectionism. 
We will press for international rules of fair trading to be extended to 
international investment, trade in services and the protection of intellectual 
property such as patents, trademarks and copyright. 
We will continue to exert pressure on countries such as Japan to open up their 
markets and provide the same freedom to trade for our exporters as they expect 
us to provide for theirs. 
As well as creating the commercial and legal framework in which industry can 
flourish, the Government must also ensure that the practical services on which 
industry and the citizen rely - transport, energy, research and development, and 
an efficient civil service - are provided to a high standard. 
Efficient Transport 
The Conservative Government is proud of a record that has: 
  modernised the transport system by investing over £10 billion in the nation's 
  motorways, roads, airports, seaports and railways; 
  since 1979 completed over 680 miles of motorway and trunk roads and 67 
  bypasses; 
  secured greater efficiency by privatising British Airways, the National 
  Freight Corporation, Sealink and Associated British Ports; 
  increased competition by deregulating long-distance coach services and 
  abolishing local bus licensing. 
These measures have laid the foundations of an efficient and more flexible 
transport system. We will develop it further along these lines. We are now 
returning the nationalised bus companies to the private sector in many cases to 
management buy-outs. We are also privatising the former British Airports 
Authority the world's leading international airports group. 
We are committed to a major capital investment programme through: 
  new investment to build an extra 450 miles of motorway and trunk roads to 
  1989/90; 
  British Rail's plans to invest £500m a year over the next 3 years; 
  private sector financing, construction and operation of the Dartford Bridge 
  and the Channel tunnel. 
Energy 
Britain is the only major Western industrial country that is a net exporter of 
energy. This owes much to North Sea oil so successfully developed by free 
enterprise. But it is an advantage that will not last indefinitely. 
Coal will continue to meet much of the steadily rising demand for electricity. 
Renewable sources of energy can make some contribution to the nation's energy 
needs, which is why government-sponsored research has been increased. 
Nevertheless, to reject, as our opponents do, the contribution of nuclear energy 
to supplying reliable, low-cost electricity, and to depend on coal alone, would 
be short-sighted and irresponsible. 
The world's resources of fossil fuels will come under increasing strain during 
the 21st century; so may the global environment if the build-up of carbon 
dioxide the so-called "greenhouse effect" significantly raises temperatures and 
changes climates. 
After the most careful and painstaking independent assessment of the safety case 
for a new pressurised water reactor at Sizewell, therefore, the Government has 
decided to proceed with the next phase of our nuclear programme. It is vital 
that we continue to give the highest priority to safety. Our nuclear industry 
has a record of safety and technical excellence second to none. 
We intend to go on playing a leading role in the task of developing abundant, 
low-cost supplies of nuclear electricity, and managing the associated waste 
products. 
Science and R & D
Government support for research and development amounts to more than £4½ billion 
per year. It is larger as a share of our national income than that of the United 
States, Japan or Germany. A country of our size cannot afford to do everything. 
These resources need to be better targeted. The task of government is to support 
basic research and to contribute where business cannot realistically be expected 
to carry all the risks. 
We will ensure that government spending is firmly directed towards areas of high 
national priority, by extending the role of the Advisory Council on Applied 
Research and Development, drawing on the full range of advice from the academic 
community and from business. 
The Civil Service
We have long had in this country a professional and dedicated public service 
which is the envy of the world. We are now building on those traditional 
qualities which can too easily be taken for granted with new strengths and 
skills: a greater readiness to adapt efficiently to change, including 
technological change, to manage the public service more effectively, and to see 
that the taxpayer gets value for money. The size of the Civil Service at under 
600,000 people today is the smallest since the war. This is already saving the 
taxpayer £1 billion a year. 
We will press on with long-term management reforms in order to improve public 
services and reduce their cost. 
AGRICULTURE AND THE RURAL ECONOMY 
Farming
Britain's farmers serve the nation well. They produce 80 per cent of the food we 
grow compared with 60 per cent only 10 years ago. They have made us into the 
world's sixth largest exporter of cereals when we had been a net importer for 
decades before. They look after 80 per cent of the British countryside. And 
consumer food prices have risen less than the cost of living, unlike the Labour 
years. 
But farmers world-wide are under pressure because of rising surpluses and the 
huge costs of disposing of them. It is just as much in the farmers' interest as 
in the consumers' and taxpayers' that this over-production be stopped and a 
radical overhaul of the Common Agricultural Policy achieved. Farmers need a more 
sustainable environment in which to plan ahead. 
We will continue: 
  to play a leading part in European Community negotiations to reform the CAP; 
  to strive for even-handed and fair treatment between Member States and between 
  the different regions of the UK; 
  to work for an early devaluation of the Green Pound, especially in relation to 
  beef; to uphold the interests of the efficient family farm; 
  to reduce costs and tackle surpluses, by bringing supply and demand in the 
  Community 
  into better balance by a combination of measures including price restraint; 
  to reduce the role for intervention, At home we will continue: 
  to promote competitiveness and innovation in British farming and horticulture; 

  to give particular assistance to farmers in the Less Favoured Areas, recently 
  extended, where farming is difficult; 
  to encourage better marketing of agricultural and horticultural products and 
  to ensure that the consumer has as much information about the contents of food 
  as is necessary to make sensible choices. 
We will not introduce rating on agricultural land and will oppose two-tier 
pricing in the CAP, which would greatly disadvantage our farmers and benefit 
their competitors. 
The Rural Economy 
Farming is, and will remain, the major industry in the countryside and food 
production will continue to be the farmer's basic purpose. The higher production 
resulting from greater efficiency and modern techniques initially means more 
land coming out of agriculture. A new balance of policies has to be struck, with 
less support for expanding production of commodities already in over-supply and 
more support for diversifying into other activities. 
We have recognised the new needs of the countryside and rural economies in two 
ways. First, we now place more emphasis on support for the environment and the 
beauty of the countryside; we now give grants to plant hedgerows, not dig them 
up. Second, we encourage alternative uses of land and more diverse job 
opportunities to maintain thriving communities in the rural economy. 
We will therefore: 
  emphasise environmental protection and promotion of non-farming rural 
  businesses in the planning system; 
  continue to support the Development Commission in developing rural 
  enterprises; 
  extend the Environmentally Sensitive Areas scheme which makes conservation a 
  more integral part of farming; 
  introduce new schemes to assist diversification of new enterprises on farms; 
  introduce a new Farm Woodland Scheme to assist alternative land use. 
The UK Fishing Industry 
Our fishing industry supplies two-thirds of the fish we eat. It is an important 
source of jobs and income in many areas. 
The Government's success in further improving the Common Fisheries Policy has 
meant that international policing has been made more effective; and increasingly 
stringent conservation measures have secured the future for our fleets. 
We will introduce legislation to ensure that UK quotas are reserved for UK 
fishermen. We are pledged to measures to enable our fishermen to take full 
advantage of all their opportunities and to improve and modernise their boats. 
Animal Welfare 
The Conservatives have a proud record over the years of promoting animal 
welfare. Most of the legislation was either initiated by Conservative 
governments or introduced as Private Members' measures by Conservative MPs when 
the Conservatives were in office. 
Since 1979 we have: 
  set up the Farm Animal Welfare Council which advises the Government on the 
  welfare of farm animals. We will continue to care for them with the advice and 
  guidance of the Farm Animal Welfare Council; 
  honoured our commitment to replace the 1876 legislation with the Animals 
  (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 - the most effective in Europe. It imposes 
  tight new controls on the use of animals for experiments. The number of 
  experiments has declined in each of the last nine years, and we expect that 
  decline to continue. 
BETTER HEALTH, BETTER CARE
Achievements in Health 
The health of the British people is steadily improving. Quite simply, we live 
longer. Life expectancy has increased and infant mortality has declined. 
Over the last eight years the Government has spent more on the Health Service 
than any previous government, Labour or Conservative. In 1979, the outgoing 
Labour Government planned to spend less than £8 billion on the nation's health. 
This year, the Conservative Government will spend nearly £21 billion. After 
allowing for inflation, that is an increase of almost a third. This extra money 
has been spent wisely and well. The Health Service today is treating more 
patients than ever before in its history. 
Money is important, but the success of the NHS depends still more on the 
dedication of the people working in it. There are over 75,000 more doctors, 
dentists and nurses than in 1978. These extra staff have enabled the NHS to 
treat 6 million more patient cases - in-patients, day cases, out-patients than 
when we took office. Sometimes they work in very difficult conditions. That is 
why the Government has reduced nurses' basic hours from 40 to 37 1/2 hours per 
week and increased their pay by 30 per cent after allowing for inflation. 
We will continue to improve the Health Service. 
Future Tasks for the Health Service 
Our policies rest on six principles: 
First, we will give greater emphasis to the prevention of avoidable illness and 
the promotion of good health to make the NHS more truly a health service and not 
merely a sickness service. 
Much progress has been made in the past eight years. 
  The improvement of the maternity services has helped to reduce by a third the 
  death rate among babies in the weeks around birth. 
  The expansion of vaccination and immunisation has prevented illness and death 
  among children. 
  Screening for cervical cancer has been improved and death rates from the 
  disease have fallen by almost 10 per cent in the past decade. 
  We have already embarked on a major campaign to tackle the problem of coronary 
  heart disease. 
  To fight AIDS, the Government has undertaken the biggest health education 
  campaign ever seen in this country one much admired abroad and is fully 
  supporting the Medical Research Council in a special programme of research 
  towards treatments and vaccines. 
These are welcome advances. 
In the next Parliament, we will build on this work by: 
  completing the network of computerised 'call and recall' systems for cervical 
  cancer screening. and extending them to younger women; 
  developing a national programme for breast cancer screening; 
  backing the newly established and powerful Health Education Authority. 
Second, we will continue to show our support for the million people working in 
the NHS, of whom half are nurses. 
Nurses wanted the assurance that, without recourse to strike action, they would 
receive fair treatment over pay. That is why we set up the independent Nurses' 
Pay Review Body. After the latest award, we will have increased nurses' pay by 
30 per cent since 1979, after allowing for inflation. That compares to the 
severe reduction of more than 20 per cent, which they suffered under the last 
Labour Government. 
Nurses also want a training and career structure which reinforces their 
professionalism, rewards experience, and offers opportunities for managerial 
responsibility without being removed to a distant desk. We share those views, 
and will seek to further them. We are particularly keen to attract experienced 
nurses back into the profession, and to encourage others to take up nursing as a 
new career. 
Hospital doctors and consultants, too, are a vital part of the Health Service. 
We have already increased the number of consultant posts and we will continue to 
work for improvements in the medical career structure. 
The NHS could not function without ancillary services. Some of these cleaning, 
catering, and laundry have been put out to competitive tender to enable health 
authorities to select the best and most effective way of providing these 
services. Savings are now approaching £100 million a year and they have gone 
directly and immediately into better patient care. 
We have undertaken consultation on the improvement of primary care. Our aim is 
to develop the strength and flexibility of the services provided by GPs, 
dentists, pharmacists, opticians and nurses who work in the community. 
There are particular problems affecting health care in inner cities. Doctors and 
nurses there take on a particularly tough and difficult job. We shall continue 
to look for new ways of helping them and improving health care, especially 
primary care in the inner cities. 
Our third principle is to modernise the whole framework of the health service 
its hospitals, its clinics, its equipment. 
In the face of economic collapse, the last Labour Government cut the hospital 
building programme by a third. This Government has embarked on the biggest 
building programme ever. It will cost £3 billion. In seven years we have already 
carried through over 200 major building projects from start to finish. 
We will complete some 125 further major new building schemes in the next three 
years, and get many more under way. 
New hospitals, too, are being built in areas lacking the provision they need. 
Old and inefficient Victorian buildings are being replaced with purpose-built 
modern hospitals. Much modern medicine and surgery is better carried out in the 
new larger hospitals, equipped with new medical technology. Wherever possible, 
however, small old hospitals have found a new role as community hospitals 
staffed by local GPs. 
Fourth, elderly, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped people, should 
be cared for within the community whenever this is right for them. 
In the past some people who should have been cared for in other ways have 
remained in hospitals, sometimes for years. That is changing. The number of 
children in long-stay hospitals for the mentally handicapped has fallen by 
almost three-quarters. The number of adults in long-stay mental handicap and 
mental illness hospitals has fallen by around 11 000. 
This changing pattern has already brought a better life to many thousands of 
people. It has the potential to do so for many thousands more. But we need to 
examine carefully various alternatives to discover what is now best for 
patients. We have set in hand the first ever full-scale review of community 
care. 
We will develop our policies in the light of its findings. 
Our fifth principle is to strengthen management. 
The NHS is a large and complex organisation. It needs good management. It is not 
a business, but it must be run in a business-like way. 
The reduction of waste and inefficiency has released hundreds of millions of 
pounds for better patient care. The sale of property which the NHS no longer 
needs - for example, because of new hospital developments is currently raising 
£200 million a year for better health care. 
We will continue to ensure that the Health Service is as efficient as possible. 
But good management is not just a matter of efficiency. We value enterprise in 
the public service just as much as in the private sector. We will continue to 
encourage district and regional managers to devise new ways of providing better 
patient care. 
Finally, the ultimate purpose of the Health Service is to serve the patient: 
that principle is at the heart of the Government's policy. 
The time some patients have to wait for treatment is the most widespread concern 
in the NHS. The Government has given priority to reducing waiting lists and 
times. We have set up a special £50 million two-year programme. This year it 
will give treatment to over 100,000 people who are waiting for operations. We 
have set targets for more hip operations for old people, and more bone marrow 
transplants for children. 
Putting patients first was the theme of our consultative document on primary 
care. We want the patient to have more information about services available from 
family doctors so that they can make a more informed choice. 
Social Security - a Fair Deal for Those in Need 
We are spending about £46 billion this year on social security benefits over 
£800 a year for every man, woman and child in the country. Expenditure on 
pensions and other benefits has risen by £13 billion on top of inflation, since 
we came into office. Most of this, an extra £9 billion, has gone to provide 
better standards of help and support to more elderly people, families with 
children, disabled people and those suffering long-term illness. The other £4 
billion has gone to help the unemployed. But we have done more than provide 
extra resources massive as the increase has been. 
For the first time for 40 years the Government has undertaken an overall review 
of the social security system. The review showed a social security system which 
was too complex and which too often did not provide help for those most in need. 
The 1986 Social Security Act tackled these problems and reformed the position so 
that the system is simpler to understand and to run. It will be fairer in the 
way it directs help to those who need it most. And it will be a system in which 
people can look forward to independence and security in retirement. 
Our policies for social security have four main aims. 
First, to ensure that those in retirement have a secure standard of living 
through state provision and their own pensions and savings. 
This Government has honoured its pledges to the pensioner and more than 
maintained the buying power of the state pension. Total spending on state 
pensions and benefits for elderly people has risen by 29 per cent after allowing 
for inflation. 
We will continue to maintain the value of the state retirement pension. 
But retired people value their independence. They do not want to rely on the 
State alone for their income nor, increasingly, are they doing so. We share 
Beveridge's original goal of a good basic pension from the State, together with 
a second income from occupational and personal pensions and savings. 
Pensioners have benefited from our success against inflation. Almost 
three-quarters of all pensioners have savings. Their income from these has grown 
by over 7 per cent on average every year since 1979. Income from savings fell by 
3Y2 per cent every year under the last Labour Government, eaten away by 
inflation. 
Occupational pensions, pensioners' savings, social security benefits and the 
state retirement pension have all increased. The total increase in income for 
the average pensioner is more than double that achieved during the last Labour 
Government. 
We are now offering new opportunities for people to obtain additional pensions 
from their jobs or their own savings. We have already improved the treatment of 
those now retiring early and of the pension rights of people changing jobs. 
We wish to encourage the 10 million employees who do not yet have their own 
occupational pension scheme to have a pension of their own. Every employee 
should have the right to take out a personal pension, fully portable from job to 
job. That is why we are extending favourable tax treatment from employers' 
schemes to personal pensions. 
As a result of these reforms, millions more people will have the opportunity to 
take out additional pensions of their own. 
In the next Parliament: 
We will reintroduce measures to give substantial tax incentives to personal 
pensions, and to enable members of occupational schemes to make additional 
voluntary contributions to a pension plan that is completely separate from their 
employers' schemes. These measures will further increase choice for millions of 
employees. 
Second, to bring more help to low income families. 
Child benefit will continue to be paid as now, and direct to the mother. 
Families on income support which replaces supplementary benefit will benefit 
from the new family premium. In addition, we will introduce the new family 
credit which will benefit twice as many low income families in work as family 
income supplement. The new system will also help tackle both the unemployment 
and the poverty traps. 
Third, to improve the framework of benefits for disabled people. 
Spending on benefits for disabled people and those suffering long-term sickness 
has been increased by 72 per cent after inflation to £6 billion. The amount 
spent on mobility allowances has been doubled, invalid care allowance extended, 
the new severe disablement allowance introduced and the invalidity trap 
abolished. The introduction of the new disablement premiums will bring an extra 
£50 million per year to disabled people. 
We are carrying out a major new survey of the needs of disabled people. This 
will be completed next year. 
Fourth, to reform the tangled web of income-related benefits which has grown up 
piecemeal over forty years. 
For the first time all the income-related benefits will be calculated in the 
same way. Where people are working, the amount of benefit they get will depend 
on their pay after tax and national insurance contributions. Thus people will 
not be made worse off by taking a job and will not lose money when their gross 
pay rises. 
The new rules, which come into effect in April next year, will be easier for 
claimants to understand and staff to run. In addition, our programme of 
computerisation - the biggest programme ever in this country will help staff to 
deliver benefits to all who are entitled to them quickly, accurately and 
courteously. 
Success in social policy depends on growth in national prosperity. Labour's 
economic failure led to damaging cuts in health care and benefits. Our 
increasing economic strength means that resources for care have grown and are 
growing - with programmes better managed, better adapted to changing demands, 
and better directed to those most in need. 
FREEDOM, LAW AND RESPONSIBILITY
Conservatives have always believed that a fundamental purpose of government is 
to protect the security of the citizen under the rule of law. There can be no 
half-heartedness, no opting out, in the fight against crime and violence: all of 
us, not just the Government or the police, share a responsibility to make safer 
our streets and homes. 
The Fight Against Crime
We do not underrate the challenge. Crime has been rising steadily over the 
years; not just in Britain but in most other countries, too. The origins of 
crime lie deep in society: in families where parents do not support or control 
their children; in schools where discipline is poor; and in the wider world 
where violence is glamorised and traditional values are under attack. 
Government alone cannot tackle such deep-rooted problems easily or quickly. But 
Government must give a lead: by backing, not attacking the police; by providing 
a tough legal framework for sentencing; by building the prisons in which to 
place those who pose a threat to society - and by keeping out of prison those 
who do not; and by encouraging local communities to prevent crime and to help 
the police detect it. All this we have done; and we will intensify these 
efforts. 
  The manpower available to the police has been increased by 16,500 since 1979. 
  We have given the police more powers to avert public disorder. 
  We have encouraged tougher sentences for violent criminals. The maximum 
  penalties for trafficking in hard drugs and for attempted rape have been 
  raised to life imprisonment. The courts have been empowered to strip drug 
  traffickers of their profits. 
  We have brought forward a number of reforms to help tackle child abuse and 
  make it more likely that offenders will be successfully prosecuted. 
  We have embarked on the biggest prison building and modernisation programme 
  this century and increased staff numbers by almost a fifth. 
Care for the Innocent 
At the same time we have extended protection for innocent people and for the 
victims of crime. 
  We have strengthened the safeguards against any abuse of police power by 
  setting up an independent police Complaints Authority, providing for the 
  tape-recording of police interviews and setting down clear rules on the proper 
  treatment of the individual citizen. 
  We have given special priority to helping the victims of crime. Police 
  treatment of rape victims has been made more sensitive. More criminals now pay 
  compensation to their victims. We are providing more money to help local 
  Victim Support Schemes. 
  We have launched a determined drive to improve the administration of justice 
  by providing for time limits by which the cases of those held in custody must 
  be heard. 58 more Circuit Judges have been appointed and 43 court building 
  projects have been completed. 
Better Justice 
The challenge before us remains great; but much has been done. The great 
majority of those who commit serious crimes of violence are brought to book. 
There are more police, better equipped to fight crime. Those who commit serious 
crimes can now expect much tougher punishment. 
Early in the new Parliament the Criminal Justice Bill will have to be 
reintroduced. It will: 
  enable child victims of physical and sexual abuse to give evidence by a live 
  video link n order to reduce the anguish which they would otherwise face; 
  raise to life imprisonment the penalty for carrying firearms while committing 
  a crime; 
  tackle, by providing for reference to the Court of Appeal, the problem of 
  lenient sentences which undermine public confidence in the criminal justice 
  system; 
  give victims of crime a statutory right to compensation under the Criminal 
  Injuries Compensation Scheme; 
  build on our previous measures stripping drug traffickers of the proceeds of 
  their crimes and extend the same approach to other serious crimes. 
We have already signed an extradition treaty with the United States which will 
make it more difficult for terrorists to escape British justice: now we will 
reform our own law on extradition so as to make still more effective the 
international war against crime. 
Building on Strength 
We will continue to put a high priority on the fight against crime, so that the 
citizen can feel safe on the street or in his home. 
We will: 
  increase the number of police further to ensure a stronger police presence on 
  our streets, to combat crime and to protect the public; 
  strengthen the law dealing with the sale and possession of offensive weapons; 
  maintain the operational independence of the police and resist pressure from 
  the Opposition parties to politicise the police by letting local authorities 
  decide policing priorities; 
  continue our present prison building programme and achieve more professional 
  and efficient working practices in the prison service; 
  institute a thorough review of the workings of the parole system. 
Our approach in all these cases is strongly supported by the general public. We 
will go further in drawing on that support by promoting crime prevention. 
Already more than 29,000 Neighbourhood Watch Schemes have sprung up since the 
last Election. We are committed to the success of this popular anti-crime 
movement. 
We will build on the support of the public by establishing a national 
organisation to promote the best practices in local crime prevention 
initiatives. 
We will seek ways to strengthen the special constabulary. 
Tackling Drug Abuse
We have taken the battle against drugs into every corner of the globe where 
production or trafficking flourishes. We have more than doubled the number of 
customs specialist drug investigators. We have strengthened the effectiveness of 
the police in the fight against drug abuse. Traffickers can now be sentenced to 
life imprisonment. They also stand to lose all the wealth generated by their 
evil trade under the most far-reaching asset seizure provisions anywhere in the 
world. 
We have funded about 200 new drug treatment facilities. Our prevention campaign, 
targeted on youngsters at risk, is encouraging a strong resistance to hard drugs 
amongst teenagers. 
The battle against drugs can and must be won. Already there are some signs that 
the heroin problem may have passed its peak. The cocaine explosion has never 
happened. It need never happen. 
We will continue to make the defeat of the drug trade a key priority. 
Immigration and Race Relations 
Immigration for settlement is now at its lowest level since control of 
Commonwealth immigration first began in 1962. Firm but fair immigration controls 
are essential for harmonious and improving community relations. 
We will tighten the existing law to ensure that the control over settlement 
becomes even more effective. 
We now require visas for visitors from the Indian sub-continent, Nigeria and 
Ghana, both to protect genuine travellers and to guard against bogus visitors 
seeking to settle here illegally. We are tackling the problem of those who 
fraudulently pose as refugees and who seek to exploit Britain's long tradition 
of giving refuse to the victims of persecution. 
We want to see members of the ethnic minorities assuming positions of leadership 
alongside their fellow citizens and accepting their full share of 
responsibility. Racial discrimination is an injustice and can have no place in a 
tolerant and civilised society. We are particularly concerned about racial 
attacks. They require effective and sympathetic attention from the police and we 
have ensured that increasingly they receive it. 
Progress towards better community relations must be on a basis of equality. 
Reverse discrimination is itself an injustice and if it were to be introduced it 
would undermine the achievement and example of those who had risen on their 
merits. 
Immigrant communities have already shown that it is possible to play an active 
and influential role in the mainstream of British life without losing one's 
distinctive cultural traditions. We also want to see all ethnic minorities 
participating fully in British culture. They will suffer permanent disadvantage 
if they remain in linguistic and cultural ghettos. 
Reforming the Law
Since the last election the Government has made a number of important reforms of 
family law. These cover the law of maintenance and distribution of property 
following divorce, measures to prevent the abduction of children and the law of 
illegitimacy. 
Particular laws which are not enforced or which are full of obvious anomalies 
risk bringing the law itself into disrepute. Changing tastes also require the 
reform of outdated laws which govern personal habits and behaviour: such reform 
should where possible be on the basis of a wide consensus. 
The present laws on Sunday trading and licensing contain innumerable anomalies. 
They are frequently flouted. 
We will therefore look for an acceptable way forward to bring sense and 
consistency to the law on Sunday trading. 
And we will liberalise the laws on liquor licensing hours so as to increase 
consumer choice, but we will also keep a sensible limit on late-night opening. 
We have already extended absent voting rights to new categories of electors. In 
particular we have enfranchised British citizens who have lived abroad for less 
than 5 years. 
We propose to extend this eligibility. 
Northern Ireland 
The British people have shown their commitment to the people of Northern Ireland 
in the common fight against terrorism, and in helping improve the economic and 
social situation in the Province. We resolutely support the security forces in 
their outstanding service to the whole community. 
We are determined that terrorism will not succeed; that the vital principles of 
democracy will be upheld; and that the people of Northern Ireland themselves 
should determine their constitutional position. 
We will maintain, against Socialist opposition, for as long as is necessary the 
special powers which the police need throughout the UK to prevent terrorism and 
bring terrorists to justice. 
There will be no change in the present status of Northern Ireland as part of the 
United Kingdom unless the people of Northern Ireland so wish it. 
That is at the heart of the Anglo-Irish Agreement which was signed with the 
Republic of Ireland in 1985. The Agreement offers reassurance to both sides of 
the community that their identities and interests will be respected, and that 
any change in the status of Northern Ireland would only come about with the 
consent of a majority of the people of the Province. It commits both governments 
to work together in the fight against terrorism. 
We will continue to work within the Province for a devolved government in which 
both communities can have confidence and will feel able to participate. 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND INNER CITIES 
The Conservative view of local government is that local people should look after 
the interests of the local community which they were elected to serve, 
maintaining and improving essential services at a price people can afford. That 
is an honourable tradition of public service, still upheld by councillors in 
most local authorities. 
But the abuses of left-wing Labour councils have shocked the nation. The Labour 
Party leadership pretends that this is a problem in only a few London boroughs. 
The truth is that the far Left control town halls in many of our cities. 
The extremists have gained power in these areas partly because too few 
ratepayers have an interest in voting for responsible councillors pursuing 
sensible policies. Many people benefit from local services yet make little or no 
contribution towards them: this throws too heavy a burden on too few shoulders. 
There is much else wrong with the present system of domestic rates. They seem 
unfair and arbitrary. And companies are left with little protection against huge 
rate rises levied by councils controlled by Labour, Liberals and Social 
Democrats, which drive them out of business and destroy jobs. 
We have acted to protect ratepayers' interests in a number of ways. The wasteful 
and unnecessary tier of the GLC and metropolitan counties has been eliminated - 
to the substantial benefit of ratepayers. Our rate-capping legislation so 
bitterly opposed by the Labour, SDP and Liberal parties in Parliament has 
protected ratepayers from huge rate increases. This year alone, twenty councils 
will be rate-capped nineteen of them Labour and one controlled by the Liberals 
and the SDP saving ratepayers several hundred million pounds. 
We will now tackle the roots of the problem. We will reform local government 
finance to strengthen local democracy and accountability. 
Local electors must be able to decide the level of service they want and how 
much they are prepared to pay for it. 
We will legislate in the first Session of the new Parliament to abolish the 
unfair domestic rating system and replace rates with a fairer Community Charge. 
This will be a fixed rate charge for local services paid by those over the age 
of 18, except the mentally ill and elderly people living in homes and hospitals. 
The less-well-off and students will not have to pay the full charge but everyone 
will be aware of the costs as well as the benefits of local services. This 
should encourage people to take a greater interest in the policies of their 
local council and in getting value for money. Business ratepayers will pay a 
Unified Business Rate at a standard rate pegged to inflation. 
We will require local authorities to put out to tender a range of services, 
including refuse collection, the cleaning of streets and buildings, vehicle 
maintenance, catering and ground maintenance. 
Ratepayers expect councils to provide their services as efficiently as possible. 
Yet some local authorities steadfastly oppose private sector companies tendering 
for services even though they could provide them more cheaply and effectively. 
The independent Audit Commission has estimated that some £500 million a year 
could be saved if all councils followed the practices of the best sums which 
could be used to lower rates or improve services. 
The Widdicombe Report into the conduct of local authority business painted a 
disturbing picture of the breakdown of democratic processes in a number of 
councils. We will take action to strengthen democratic processes in local 
authorities. 
Inner Cities 
The regeneration of the inner cities must be tackled. The growth in our national 
prosperity in recent years has been founded on a rebirth of enterprise. But in 
many of our inner cities the conditions for enterprise and pride of ownership 
have been systematically extinguished by Socialist councils. For the sake of 
those living in our inner cities we must remove the barriers against private 
investment, jobs and prosperity which such councils have erected. 
We are setting up five new Urban Development Corporations which will have the 
powers, resources and management structure to reclaim and redevelop great tracts 
of derelict land: these new Corporations will follow the model successfully 
applied in London Docklands and on Merseyside. 
Our Unified Business Rate will ensure that companies and jobs are not driven out 
of inner city areas by the high rates of profligate councils. 
We have roughly doubled the resources to reclaim derelict land. We will improve 
procedures to accelerate the process of bringing vacant and under-used public 
sector land back into productive use. 
We will build on the experience of Urban Development Corporations by creating 
new mini-UDCs. These will operate on a smaller scale in areas where there is 
clear economic potential but where the local authorities are failing to tackle 
the problem. 
Our Urban Programme provides a range of grants to help industry and local 
councils undertake projects that will improve the environment and encourage new 
investment. 
We are helping to lead local action through our five City Action Teams, sixteen 
Inner City Task Forces and the Inner City Partnerships. All of them draw on 
government assistance and work with local business and local people to promote 
enterprise, employment and training. 
Great cities are built on the enterprise and vitality of the individuals who 
live there. Our aim is to create a climate which encourages and harnesses that 
energy in the interests of all. 
A BETTER SOCIETY
Planning and the Environment 
Conservatives are by instinct conservationists - committed to preserve all that 
is best of our country's past. We are determined to maintain our national 
heritage of countryside and architecture. Since taking office we have: 
  more than doubled the area of specially protected Green Belt: we will continue 
  to defend it against unsuitable development; 
  established new arrangements, backed with public funds, to make farming more 
  sensitive to wildlife and to conservation; 
  completed the work of listing pre-war buildings which receive legal protection 
  and extended such protection to the best post-war buildings; 
  established a new, powerful Pollution Inspectorate; 
  passed new laws on the control of pesticides and implemented new controls on 
  the pollution of water; 
  put in hand plans for cleaning up Britain's beaches, costing over £300 million 
  over the next four years; 
  more than doubled spending after allowing for inflation on countryside and 
  nature conservation since 1979; 
  set in hand the establishment of the new Norfolk Broads Authority - a major 
  environmental initiative; 
  established a huge programme, costing over £4,000 million, to clean up the 
  environment of the Mersey Basin by the early years of the next century. 
We are determined to maintain the Green Belt. We will protect the countryside 
for its own sake and conserve its wildlife, while allowing for those small scale 
and well planned developments which are needed to provide jobs and keep country 
areas thriving. 
Wherever possible we want to encourage large-scale developments to take place on 
unused and neglected land in our towns and cities rather than in the 
countryside. We want to improve on our performance in 1986 when nearly half of 
all new development took place on reused land. 
A Practical Agenda 
Only the Conservatives have a serious costed agenda for further environmental 
action for another five years of Government. We will: 
  continue our £600 million programme of modifying power stations, to combat 
  acid rain; 
  adopt improved standards, in concert with Europe, for reducing pollution from 
  cars. We have already reduced tax on lead-free petrol and will encourage its 
  wider use; 
  introduce new laws on air pollution and dangerous wastes; 
  double the funding for Environmentally Sensitive Areas; 
  introduce new laws giving extra protection to the landscape of our National 
  Parks; 
  encourage more small woodlands in lowland areas through new grants; 
  legislate to safeguard common land on the basis of the Common Land Forum, and 
  continue to protect public access to the countryside through footpaths; 
  support scientifically justified, international action to protect the 
  atmosphere and the sea from damage from pollutants; 
  establish a National Rivers Authority to take over responsibilities for 
  ensuring strict safeguards against the pollution of rivers and water courses 
  and to pursue sound conservation policies. The water supply and sewage 
  functions of the water authorities will be transferred to the private sector; 
  set up safe facilities for disposing of radioactive waste from power stations, 
  hospitals and other sources: we have asked UK NIREX to come forward with 
  proposals for deep disposal. 
The Arts 
Our international reputation in the arts has never been higher. Tourists flock 
to this country to enjoy the highest standards of theatre, music, artistic 
excellence and our museums. Art centres have nearly doubled in number since 
1979. Attendances at theatres, concerts, cinemas and historic houses have all 
risen significantly. 
Under the Conservatives, spending on the arts has risen by 15 per cent since 
1979 after allowing for inflation. Over the same period, the Arts Council grant 
has risen from £61 million to nearly £139 million. And schemes like the Business 
Sponsorship Incentive Scheme have pushed the value of such sponsorship from £72 
million to £25 million over the last decade. 
In future years: 
  We will maintain government support for the arts and continue to encourage 
  private support. 
  We will make it a major objective to ensure that excellence in the arts is 
  available in all parts of the country. 
  We will continue to safeguard our heritage, particularly through the National 
  Heritage Memorial Fund, created by this Government in 1980 to assist the 
  preservation, maintenance and acquisition of items of outstanding merit which 
  might otherwise be lost to the nation. 
  We will encourage our great national museums and galleries to make the 
  national treasures which they house more widely accessible. 
Sport 
We have increased funding for the Sports Council from £15 million in 1978/79 to 
£37 million in 1987/88. 
We will continue to work with the Council and, through our funding of the Sports 
Council National Centres, we will encourage the pursuit of excellence in our 
sports. 
We want to encourage competitive sports through schools and clubs and we 
strongly oppose any attempts to ban competitive sports in schools. 
We will continue to encourage schools and colleges to open their facilities for 
community use wherever possible to co-operate with other owners to achieve 
public access to sport premises. 
Football hooliganism has tarnished the good name of British sportsmanship. We 
have acted to control the sale of alcohol at sports grounds. We have enhanced 
police powers to stop and search at football grounds and we have encouraged 
tougher sentencing of hooligans. 
Broadcasting 
Our objectives for broadcasting are to provide consumers with a wider range of 
programmes, to encourage independent producers, and to preserve the high 
standards which we have traditionally enjoyed in British broadcasting. 
Vital decisions will need to be made in the next Parliament. We have already 
published proposals for a less regulated and more diverse radio system. We shall 
follow a policy of more competition, variety and innovation in our domestic 
networks and encourage the export of British programmes to international 
audiences and markets. The development of the broadcasting industry will be 
allowed to occur, wherever possible, commercially. 
We will therefore introduce a major new Broadcasting Bill in the new Parliament. 
It will enable the broadcasters to take full advantage of the opportunities 
presented by technological advances and to broaden the choice of viewing and 
listening. 
The broadcasters owe it to the lively talent in the independent sector to take 
more programmes from them. 
We will ensure that at least 25 per cent of programmes broadcast on both ITV and 
BBC will be supplied by independent producers as soon as possible. 
The responsibility for enforcing broadcasting standards must rest with the 
broadcasting authorities. The present Broadcasting Complaints Commission has a 
relatively narrow remit. But there is deep public concern over the display of 
sex and violence on television. We will therefore bring forward proposals for 
stronger and more effective arrangements to reflect that concern. 
We will remove the current exemption enjoyed by broadcasters under the Obscene 
Publications Act 1959. 
BRITAIN AND THE WORLD
Britain is once again giving a lead in world affairs. We are forthright in 
support of freedom and justice. We stand up vigorously for Britain's interests 
abroad. Our voice is heard with respect on the crucial issues of war and peace, 
of finance and trade. 
Defending the Nation 
The first duty of government is the defence of the realm and the preservation of 
peace. Nuclear weapons are vital to that task. In the 40 years since 1945, more 
than 10 million people have died in wars around the globe. But there has been 
peace in Europe. 
Conventional weapons did not succeed in deterring war. But nuclear weapons have 
prevented, not only nuclear war, but conventional war in Europe as well. A 
strong defence policy has proved to be the most effective peace policy. 
Labour's policy is to give up Britain's independent nuclear deterrent without 
asking anything in return. The Labour Party would require the United States to 
withdraw its nuclear weapons from our soil and to close down NATO nuclear bases 
in Britain. It would remove Britain altogether from the protection of the United 
States' nuclear umbrella. 
That policy would abandon the defence policy followed by every British 
government, Labour or Conservative, since the Second World War. It would expose 
us to nuclear blackmail from the vast Soviet armoury, to which we would have no 
reply. It would inflict damage, perhaps fatal damage, on the Atlantic Alliance 
on which we and Western Europe depend for our security. It would strike at our 
relations with our most important ally, weakening the American commitment to 
Europe's defences. It would, in short, be the biggest victory for the Soviet 
Union in 40 years. 
The defence policy of the Liberals and Social Democrats is muddled and confused. 
They would cancel Trident and they have no clear idea of what to put in its 
place. Their suggested replacements are much more expensive than Trident, which 
costs only 3p in every £ of defence spending. None would be available in time. 
None would provide equal security. 
The Liberal and SDP defence policy would be one-sided disarmament by default or 
inadvertence. The only difference between it and Labour policy is a matter of 
timing. Labour would scrap Britain's deterrent immediately upon entering office. 
The Liberals and Social Democrats would allow it to wither on the vine. 
Only the Conservative Party stands by the defence policy which every post-war 
government has seen to be necessary and which has kept the peace of Europe for 
more than a generation. We are not prepared to take risks with Britain's 
security: 
  We will stand fully by our obligations to our European and American allies in 
  NATO. 
  We will retain our independent nuclear deterrent and modernise it with 
  Trident. Because of improvements in Soviet defences we need the greater 
  capability of Trident to retain the necessary deterrence which Polaris gives. 
  No amount of money spent on conventional defence would ever buy us the same 
  degree of deterrence. 
  We will continue to increase the effectiveness of our conventional forces, to 
  provide them with the most modern equipment and to obtain better value for 
  money from the defence budget. We have already increased defence spending by 
  more than 20 per cent in real terms since 1979 and restored the pay and 
  conditions of our servicemen. 
But we also want to see a world in which there are fewer nuclear weapons. That 
is why Britain is at the forefront of arms control negotiations. 
We strive with our allies to achieve balanced and verifiable agreements for: 
  the elimination of medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe and preferably 
  world-wide; 
  agreed constraints on shorter-range missiles; 
  a 50 per cent cut in strategic nuclear missiles; 
  and a world-wide ban on chemical weapons. 
Western strength and resolution are essential to achieve these aims. That is why 
the Conservative Government deployed Cruise missiles. All the Opposition parties 
- Labour, Liberals and SDP - voted against deployment in the House of Commons. 
Yet it was the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles which brought the 
Soviet Union back to the negotiating table. We can look forward to an agreement 
this year which will, for the first time, reduce the numbers of nuclear weapons. 

With the Conservatives Britain is also taking the lead in working towards 
greater trust and confidence between East and West, and to encourage changes in 
the East, where disillusion with totalitarian Socialism grows inexorably. The 
Prime Minister's historic visit to Moscow was a major contribution to this. We 
shall welcome any move by the Soviet Union towards respect for basic human 
rights. But we must not lower our guard. Strong defence is still the surest 
foundation for building peace. 
Europe Grows in Strength 
This Government has taken Britain from the sidelines into the mainstream of 
Europe. But being good Europeans does not prevent us from standing up for 
British interests. The agreement we negotiated on the Community Budget has saved 
Britain £4,500 million since 1984. 
We will continue to work for strict controls on the Community Budget. 
Britain has led the way in establishing a genuine common market, with more trade 
and services moving freely across national boundaries. 
We will campaign for the opening of the market in financial and other services 
and the extension of cheaper air fares in Europe. 
We will also continue to work with our European partners to defend our own 
trading interests and press for freer trade among all nations. 
All of this will help safeguard existing jobs and create new ones. 
We will continue to play a responsible leading role in the development of the 
Community, while safeguarding our essential national interests. 
Firm Against Terrorism and Aggression 
Britain has stood at the forefront in the fight against international terrorism. 
No democracy has a better record than Britain in standing up to the terrorists, 
who threaten the most basic values of civilised life. 
We will seek the support of other democratic nations for the provisions of the 
European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism. 
We stood up to aggression in the Falklands and would do so again, if necessary. 
We want normal relations with Argentina. We have made numerous proposals to that 
end. But we stand by our pledges to the Islanders. We will not negotiate on the 
sovereignty of the Falklands. 
The Wider World 
When other countries are prepared to act in good faith, the Conservative 
Government has shown the will and the diplomatic skill to find solutions to 
age-old conflicts and misunderstandings. Our record of tackling long-standing 
problems in Hong Kong, Zimbabwe and Gibraltar demonstrates our determination to 
seek peaceful and imaginative settlements of difficult international disputes. 
We have played a prominent part in bringing Israel and the moderate Arab states 
closer to peace negotiations in the framework of an international conference. 
We believe that the issues of Southern Africa, too, will be tackled best by 
dialogue, not violence. We want to see an end to apartheid in South Africa. But 
trade and economic sanctions would only serve to entrench apartheid, increase 
the risk of bloodshed and inflict severe hardship on black South Africans 
without bringing a settlement any nearer. Negotiations between the leaders of 
the South African people are the best way to resolve the problems of that 
unhappy country. 
Overseas Aid 
We have the sixth largest aid programme in the western world, and the third 
largest in Europe, spending about £1,300 million each year. Britain pioneered 
the reform of Europe's food aid policy, to make it more rapid and effective. We 
have substantially increased our support for the disaster, famine and refugee 
relief activities of voluntary agencies, as well as for their long-term 
development work. We have led the way in giving help to the people of Ethiopia, 
ravaged by famine. Our "Aid and Trade Provision" funds have helped win good 
development contracts for British firms worth over £2 billion since 1979. 
We will maintain our substantial aid programme and direct it ever more 
effectively. 
We will bring more young people from Commonwealth and other countries to train 
and study in Britain. 
We ourselves have made positive and practical proposals for international action 
to help some of the poorest and most indebted countries of sub-Saharan Africa. 
Labour's proposal of selective import controls would damage developing 
countries, open the door to protectionism and harm those poorest countries which 
most need our help. It would also be bad for Britain. The best contribution 
Britain can make to developing countries is to champion open trade and free 
enterprise abroad and to practise them at home. 
A Fateful Choice 
For decades there was basic agreement between political parties on defence and 
foreign policy. That agreement was firmly in the national interest. It has been 
torn up by our opponents. 
Labour's policy would mean not a secure Britain, but a neutralist Britain. And 
eventually for there can be no trifling with Soviet power a frightened and 
fellow-travelling Britain. 
The Liberals and Social Democrats would take us more slowly down that same 
disastrous road. 
This election matters more for our safety and freedom than any election since 
the Second World War. 
CONCLUSION: THE WAY FORWARD
The proposals outlined in this manifesto are the extension of policies which 
have already proved outstandingly successful. 
Today Britain is a stable and well-governed country which exercises great 
influence in the world. 
We seek the support of the British people to make this achievement truly secure, 
to build upon it and to extend its benefits to all. 
No previous government with eight years of office to its credit has ever 
presented the electorate with such a full programme of radical reform. 
No other party, presenting its manifesto proposals to the nation, has been able 
to support them with such a solid record of achievement. 
We commend them with confidence to the British people.

British Conservative Party election manifesto, 1992Conservative Party 1992 
The Best Future for Britain



FOREWORD
At the end of this Parliament a new Millennium will be in view We must raise our 
sights high. This Manifesto is about making our country respected and secure, 
and helping you achieve a better; safer and more prosperous future. For I 
believe - strongly - that you, and not the Government, should be in charge of 
your life. That's what Conservatism stands for. That principle underlies all the 
policies in this Manifesto. 
I believe in a responsible society Government's duties are clear: to protect 
Britain in a dangerous world; to look after those who cannot look after 
themselves; to protect law-abiding people from crime and disorder; and to 
protect the value of our currency - without which all spending pledges are 
worthless and all savings at risk. 
But I believe also in a society in which government doesn't try to take 
responsibility away from people. Politicians must never make the mistake of 
thinking the state always knows best, or that it is entitled to the lion's share 
of people's money I believe in low taxes not just because they ignite enterprise 
- the spark of economic growth - but because they put power and choice where it 
belongs: in your hands. 
So when you compare what the politicians are saying in this election, ask 
yourself these questions. Whom do you trust to take responsibility for Britain's 
defence; to keep us safe and strengthen our influence for good? And who, at the 
same time, wants to give you the opportunity to do your best for yourself and 
your family? 
Who will give you the power to choose - to say for yourself what you want? And 
who will give you the personal prosperity that comes from low taxes - from your 
own savings, your own pension, your own home? Who will let you build up your own 
stake in Britain's success - and pass it on to your children? 
Only Conservatives can truly claim to be the party of opportunity; choice; 
ownership and responsibility. Socialists like to keep people under the 
government's thumb. Conservatives want to give them independence. But we also 
want to put government at your service, giving you what you've paid for - good 
public services, responsible to you. 
I do not believe the answer to every problem is simply for government to dig 
deeper in your pocket. I believe it often lies in changing the way government 
works; in making it respond to you. Government should look outwards. It should 
listen. It should put you in the know not keep you in the dark. 
We have made quite a start, under the seal of the Citizen's Charter People in 
schools, hospitals, public offices of all kinds are rising to the challenge. I 
knew they would. They just needed encouragement, incentive and a system that is 
outward-looking too. 
It is all part of a revolution in quality in Britain. British goods are once 
more winning in the toughest markets abroad. There is new vigour in the 
businesses liberated from state ownership; better management and better 
industrial relations. These are the firm foundations of economic recovery 
We are raising the quality of our education and training. We are raising the 
standard of our housing, as more people own and improve their own homes. We are 
concerned for the quality of our environment. And in government, we are leading 
a drive for quality throughout our public services. 
That, I believe, is the way we all want to live - a decent life in a civilised 
community. That is the way we can live: celebrating our achievements, not 
nurturing old grudges; enjoying our successes, not talking Britain down. We can 
be free of old prejudices and class bafflers. We can encourage diversity, not 
division; achievement, not antagonism. We can all make our own contribution to 
the success of the United Kingdom; and we must keep that kingdom united. 
You know I believe in choice. And in this election, as always, there is another 
choice. You can vote for our opponents, and watch them take Britain back to the 
1970s. Back to socialism. Back to strikes. Back to strife. Back to the world's 
pity, or worse still, contempt. I don't believe Britain wants that. I know the 
world doesn't want that for Britain. 
I hope you will choose a different path - to go forward, not back; to go for the 
best, knowing that Britain can be the best and do it best. My belief is clean 
Only the best is good enough for Britain. 
John Major



CONTENTS
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR BRITAIN
The need for leadership
Our influence for good
The risks we face now
Our armed forces
The European Community 
WEALTH AND OWNERSHIP
Britain's opportunity
Inflation and Europe
The route to lower taxes
The right to own
Setting the economy free
Privatisation
Energy, science and innovation
Regional policies and small businesses
Consumer affairs 
CHOICE AND THE CHARTER
The Citizen's Charter
The Post Office
Whitehall & Westminster 
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL
Schools, pupils & parents
Teaching
After 16
Higher education
The training revolution
Workers and unions
Women and opportunity 
FREEDOM UNDER LAW
Police and the community
Protectors and victims
Penalties and prevention
Reforming our prisons
Our legal system
Pornography, privacy, libel
Community relations
Immigration and refugees
The danger of drugs
The threat of terrorism 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERS
The NHS - present and future
Care services
Children
Social security
Disabled people
The voluntary sector
Animal welfare 
A BRIGHTER BRITAIN
Homes and housing
Transport
Local government
Cities
London
The countryside
Farming, forestry and fishing
The environment 
TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM
Millennium Fund
Arts
Sport
Our heritage
Broadcasting 
A UNITED KINGDOM
The Union
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland

YOUR CHOICE AT THIS ELECTION



TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR BRITAIN
The world has been transformed in recent years. Communism has collapsed in 
Eastern Europe, and the Soviet Union has fallen apart. Everywhere Socialism is 
in retreat and democracy, human rights and market economics are advancing. The 
authority of the UN has been bolstered and Iraqi aggression seen off. Talks are 
under way in the Middle East and South Africa. It is a time of great 
opportunity, but also of new dangers. 
Britain needs firm leadership at this time. We must be represented by a team of 
quality and experience. A team which can help shape the world for the next 
century A Conservative team. 
Under the Conservatives, Britain has regained her rightful influence in the 
world. We have stood up for the values our country has always represented. We 
have defended Britain's interests with vigour and with success. 
The respect with which Britain is regarded in the world has rarely been higher. 
We play a central part in world affairs as a member of the European Community, 
NATO, the Commonwealth and the Group of 7 leading industrial countries, and as a 
Permanent Member of the UN Security Council. No other country holds all these 
positions. 
We are taking a leading role in recasting all the main international 
institutions to which we belong: the United Nations, the European Community, 
NATO, and the Commonwealth. The Prime Minister convened the first ever meeting 
of the UN Security Council at Heads of Government level. Between now and the end 
of 1992 there will be seven Summits where issues of critical importance to our 
future will be determined: two EC Councils, at Lisbon and Edinburgh, the G7 
Summit, the CSCE Summit, EC Summits with the US and Japan, and the Earth Summit 
at Rio de Janeiro. Britain will be at the centre of these negotiations. 
THE NEED FOR LEADERSHIP 
The end of the Cold War has enabled the UN to act with new unity and authority 
Under the authority of the UN, British forces played a leading and courageous 
part in the Gulf War and the liberation of Kuwait. At the Prime Minister's 
instigation, the UN also backed the operation to protect the Kurds. 
Britain has led the world in helping the reforms in the former Soviet Union. The 
Prime Minister gave full and immediate support to President Yeltsin in the 
August coup attempt, and was the first Western leader to visit Moscow after the 
coup failed. Britain has led the way in building up relations with the republics 
of the new Commonwealth of Independent States. We have provided valuable 
economic and humanitarian aid to ease the transition to a market economy 
  We will support an enhanced role for the UN in peace-keeping and combating 
  state-sponsored terrorism. 
  We are determined that Iraq should comply with the terms of the Guff War 
  cease-fire agreement, and in particular that it should co-operate with the UN 
  in dismantling its weapons of mass destruction. 
  We support early Russian membership of the IMF and World Bank, as well as a 
  stabilisation fund for the rouble. 
  We are co-operating with our partners to provide urgent help to the former 
  Soviet Union and Eastern Europe to upgrade the safety of their nuclear power 
  stations. 
  We strongly support the peace process in the Middle East. The outcome of the 
  talks must safeguard the security of Israel and achieve self-determination for 
  the people of the occupied territories. 
  We will safeguard the prosperity of Hong Kong, nurture democratic institutions 
  and work with the Chinese Government within the terms of the Joint 
  Declaration. 
  We seek a solution to the dispute which has divided Cyprus since 1974. A 
  settlement must recognise that Cyprus is indivisible and that the rights of 
  both communities must be assured. We will support the UN's efforts to secure a 
  fair and lasting solution. 
  The problems of Kashmir cannot be resolved by violence. We urge both India and 
  Pakistan to address and resolve the issue, and we stand ready to help. 
OUR INFLUENCE FOR GOOD 
All over the world countries are turning to democracy and free markets. Last 
October in Harare, the Commonwealth took on a new role as a promoter of 
democracy the rule of law, and respect for individual freedoms. Already the 
Commonwealth is monitoring elections to ensure that they are free and fair. 
Britain is taking the lead in encouraging these trends. 
We give substantial aid to the relief of poverty and to help the struggling 
economies of the developing world. Our aid programme next year (excluding aid to 
Eastern Europe and the CIS) will reach £1,800 million. Britain also makes more 
direct private investment in the developing world than any other EC country - 
some £2,400 million in 1989. We are urging the international community to take 
decisive action on debt relief, the liberalisation of world trade and support 
for good government. 
We continue to accept the long term UN target for aid of 0.7 per cent of GNP, 
although we cannot set a timetable for its achievement. The quality of Britain's 
overseas aid programme is second to none. It is well targeted and highly 
effective. Eighty per cent of our bilateral aid goes to the poorest countries. 
New aid to the poorest is given as grants, not loans. 
We are supporting projects designed to build efficient institutions and 
accountable government. We are helping to improve public administration and the 
legal system in a number of countries. 
The English language is one of our nation's greatest assets - culturally 
politically and commercially The BBC World Service has unrivalled standing 
around the globe. The British Council acts as a cultural ambassador for Britain 
and for the English language. 
  We will use overseas aid to promote good government, sensible economic 
  policies, the rooting out of corruption, and - crucially - respect for human 
  rights and the rule of law. 
  We will press creditor countries to accept the Prime Minister's proposal - the 
  'Trinidad Terms' - for a two-thirds reduction in the official debt of the 
  poorest countries. 
  We will promote the development of multi- party systems through the new 
  Westminster Foundation for Democracy. 
  We will promote the English language by strengthening both the British Council 
  and the BBC World Service. We will encourage both to become more 
  entrepreneurial in order to finance their activities in developing markets. 
THE RISKS WE FACE NOW 
The collapse of the old Soviet Union has dramatically vindicated Conservative 
defence policy. We have always put the security of our country first. We have 
kept the peace by staying strong. 
Today the threat of a massive surprise attack from Eastern Europe has gone. But 
we still face grave risks to our security. We cannot drop our guard. Under the 
Conservatives, Britain will never do so. 
Within the former Soviet Union there remains a huge military force. Democracy 
and the rule of law are yet to be firmly established. Control over these armed 
forces and the massive nuclear capability is uncertain. The events in Yugoslavia 
show what can happen when Communism collapses in disorder. 
Increasingly threats come from outside Europe - as we saw so clearly in the 
Gulf. Many more countries are acquiring large stocks of modern arms. Some are 
trying to obtain nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. Britain must be able 
to respond to any unexpected danger. 
The Conservatives are the only party who recognise both the opportunities and 
the threats of the new world. 
For over forty years, our security has been based firmly on NATO, the most 
successful defensive alliance ever. We will work with our allies to ensure that 
NATO remains the cornerstone of our defence. Britain will command a new NATO 
Rapid Reaction Corps ready to deploy quickly to counter any sudden threat. As 
Europeans we must accept a greater role in safeguarding the peace in our 
continent. 
We will promote arms control and reduction initiatives. On Britain's initiative, 
the UN is establishing a register of arms transfers in order to monitor any 
dangerous arsenals of weapons. 
Britain has always been strongly opposed to nuclear proliferation. We will back 
an enhanced role for the International Atomic Energy Agency in inspecting 
nuclear sites and for the UN Security Council in acting against those nations 
which break their non proliferation obligations. 
  We will work to strengthen the Western European Union as the European pillar 
  of NATO. We will press for a European reaction force. 
  We will intensify the co-ordination of security policies within the Twelve. 
  We will work through the CSCE to safeguard the security of Europe. 
  We will support a comprehensive and verifiable ban on chemical weapons, and 
  further controls on the export of items which could be used in making 
  biological weapons. 
  We will help Russia in her efforts to dismantle nuclear weapons. 
OUR ARMED FORCES 
Only the Conservatives can be trusted to maintain the quality and capability of 
our Armed Forces. We are proud of the skill, courage and professionalism which 
they displayed in the Gulf and which they show daily in Northern Ireland. 
We are the only party unambiguously committed to the preservation and 
modernisation of our independent nuclear deterrent. 
Our defence would be unsafe in the hands of the opposition parties. Labour have 
opposed our defence policies at every turn. They have twisted and turned in 
their attitude to our nuclear deterrent. They would devastate our conventional 
forces by cuts of at least 27 per cent, which would lead to huge job losses in 
the defence industries. 
The Liberal Democrats would cause even more damage to Britain's defences. Their 
aim is to cut our defence spending by half by the end of the decade. 
We insist that our forces have the modern, effective equipment that they need. 
The Gulf War showed that the Services must have the latest technology to give 
them maximum flexibility and mobility. That is why we have ordered the new 
Challenger II tank for the Army, the Merlin helicopter for the Navy, the ASRAAM 
air defence missile for the RAF and a wide range of other new equipment for our 
Forces. 
Our reappraisal of Britain's defence needs will result an a major restructuring 
of our Armed Forces to take account of the changing world situation. In future 
our Forces will be smaller, but better equipped. Our Services deserve the 
excellent pay and conditions which we have secured for them and will maintain. 
  We will complete the deployment of the next generation of Britain's minimum 
  nuclear deterrent. We will order and complete the fourth Trident submarine. 
  We will ensure the Forces have the best and most modern equipment. 
  We will improve the quality and management of service housing and help those 
  in the Forces save towards buying a home of their own. 
  The Reserves will play an even more important role and we will introduce 
  legislation to allow their more flexible use. 
THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY 
The Conservatives have been the party of Britain in Europe for 30 years. We have 
argued when argument was necessary; but we have not wavered nor changed our 
views. We have ensured that Britain is at the heart of Europe; a strong and 
respected partner. 
We have played a decisive part in the development of the Community over the past 
decade. It was a British initiative which launched the Single Market programme 
and our insistence which reformed the Community's finances. Britain has promoted 
co-operation on foreign policy and in combating terrorism. Britain has also 
persuaded our partners to welcome new countries who apply for Community 
membership. 
The Maastricht Treaty was a success both for Britain and for the rest of Europe. 
British proposals helped to shape the key provisions of the Treaty including 
those strengthening the enforcement of Community law defence, subsidiarity and 
law and order. But Britain refused to accept the damaging Social Chapter 
proposed by other Europeans, and it was excluded from the Maastricht treaty 
All Member States must live up to their obligations under Community law. At 
Maastricht, we secured agreement that the European Court will be able to fine 
any Member State which fails to do so. 
  We will work closely with our partners in foreign policy and in the war on 
  international crime. 
  We will continue to resist changes to the Treaty of Rome that would damage 
  British business. 
  We will resist Commission initiatives which run counter to the principle that 
  issues should be dealt with on a national basis wherever possible. 
  Britain is a great trading nation. We prosper through the maintenance of an 
  open trading system. We will work for a successful outcome to the GATT 
  negotiations. 
  We will redouble our efforts to reform the Common Agricultural Policy and will 
  stoutly defend the interests of British farmers and consumers. 
  We will insist on more effective control over Community spending and will 
  resist pressure to extend Community competence to new areas. 
  We will work to strengthen the external frontiers of the Community whilst 
  maintaining the checks needed at our own borders against illegal immigration, 
  drugs, terrorism and disease. 
THE BRITISH PRESIDENCY 
In the second half of 1992 Britain will take the Chair of the Council of 
Ministers. The British Presidency comes at a turning point in the Community's 
history. It gives us the opportunity to shape the direction of the Community and 
to establish its priorities. We shall use it to promote our vision of an outward 
looking Community based on free enterprise. 
Our Presidency will reach its climax at the Edinburgh meeting of the European 
Council, which we will hold in the historic palace of Holyrood House. While the 
attention of Europe is focused on Edinburgh, the strength of our Union will be 
visible to all. 
Our priorities will be: 
  To start negotiations with those EFTA countries who want to join the Community 
  so that they can join by 1995. 
  To build on the EC's Association Agreements with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and 
  Poland so that we can welcome them to full membership by the year 2000. 
  To conclude EC trade and co-operation agreements with the main republics of 
  the former Soviet Union. 
  To complete the single market and extend it to the seven countries of EFTA- 
  Over half our trade is with the rest of the Community. The single market will 
  create an open market of 350 million customers for British goods and services. 
  To complete the single market we shall aim to: 
    open up the market for life insurance to free competition; 
    liberalise air travel to bring down air fares in Europe closer to those in 
    America; 
    free up the shipping and road transport markets so that British operators 
    can carry freely within the EC; 
    increase competition in the European energy sector. 
  We will provide guidance and help to any British company encountering a trade 
  barrier illegal under European law. 
  We will press for progress on the environment, including the Fifth Environment 
  Action Programme. 
  We will chair the negotiations on the future spending priorities of the 
  Community to ensure value for money. We will safeguard the abatement 
  negotiated by Mrs Thatcher which has so far brought some £12,000 million in 
  budget rebates to Britain. 
WEALTH AND OWNERSHIP
The 1990s present a great economic opportunity for Britain. We have got the 
scourge of inflation under control. We have cut direct tax rates. And a stable 
currency gives industry a chance to realise the potential released by the 
reforms of the 1980s. 
We have extended ownership more widely - of homes, savings and shares - with 
millions more sharing directly in Britain's success. We will promote enterprise 
through low taxes, sound money and a stable currency. 
When the Exchange Rate Mechanism was being created, during the final days of the 
last Labour Government, the then Prime Minister decided Britain could not take 
part. 
It was easy to see why The economy was too weak. Inflation was too high. In 
1974-79, the inflation rate averaged over 15 per cent. It peaked at 27 per cent. 
Public borrowing rose to nearly 10 per cent of national income - equivalent to 
£55,000 million today Penal taxes blunted enterprise. Britain was a byword for 
strikes. 
The Conservatives have changed all that. Since 1979, our inflation rate has 
averaged 7½ per cent. Now it is only just over 4 per cent - below the average 
for the European Community In the 1960s and 1970s, Britain had the slowest 
growth rate in the European Community. But in the 1980s, we grew faster than 
either France or Germany Industrial disputes became rare events. And in 1990, a 
Conservative Government joined the ERM. 
Penal taxes have been abolished. A man on average earnings, with a wife and two 
children, has an income today which after tax and inflation is 39 per cent 
higher than it was in Labour's last year. That great advance in the standard of 
living is at risk in this election. 
Since the war, living standards have always risen faster under Conservative 
Governments than under Labour. Now we are pledged to cut tax rates again - and 
have made a start on the road to 20p Income Tax. 
Corporate tax rates have been cut, too. Our business investment has increased 
more rapidly than in any other major economy except Japan. Britain attracts by 
far the biggest share of Japanese and American investment in Europe. That, too, 
is at risk in this election. 
BRITAIN'S OPPORTUNITY 
We are now members of: 
  The biggest free market in the world. British industry is again respected in 
  Europe. 
  A zone of low inflation, in which we can compete with the best. 
Britain must not throw this opportunity away by electing a Labour government. 
The world recession has been tough for all of us, at home and abroad. 
Unemployment has risen. But in Britain we have laid the foundations for recovery 
What is needed to trigger confidence and growth is a Conservative victory with a 
decisive majority. What would postpone recovery, and turn this promise of growth 
into the certainty of hard times, is the election of our opponents whose 
policies would mean higher taxes, higher inflation, higher interest rates, more 
bureaucratic regulation and more strikes. 
In the 1990s, the Government's task will be to provide an economic environment 
which encourages enterprise - the mainspring of prosperity. Our aims must be: 
  To achieve price stability. 
  To keep firm control over public spending. 
  To continue to reduce taxes as fast as we prudently can. 
  To make sure that market mechanisms and incentives are allowed to do their 
  job. 
Price stability does not mean a frozen economy in which no price ever moves. But 
we must drive inflation down so low that it no longer affects the decisions made 
by ordinary people, businesses and government. 
When inflation rises, so do bankruptcies. When inflation falls, industry can 
plan again for a profitable future. Inflation creates strife, as different 
groups in society struggle to restore their living standards. It destroys jobs. 
It erodes savings and social benefits and threatens our currency. 
INFLATION AND EUROPE 
Membership of the ERM is now central to our counter-inflation discipline. But 
the ERM is not a magic wand. It would not protect Labour; it would merely expose 
the folly of Labour policies. Some Labour politicians know that all too well - 
others simply don't. They - and some of the unions - would put irresistible 
spending pressure on a Labour government. 
Some members of the European Community are anxious to hurry on from the ERM to 
Economic and Monetary Union. Others have doubts. Quite apart from the 
constitutional issues, they do not want to take risks with what is being 
achieved in the ERM. 
The Treaty negotiated at Maastricht laid down the process under which the 
Community can, if its members meet certain economic conditions, create a 
monetary union with a single currency for some or all of them. Together with 
Germany we fought for tough criteria. We believe a monetary union would 
collapse, with damaging consequences, if it were imposed on economies that were 
too diverse. 
A union will only come about by 1997 if a substantial majority of Community 
members agree it should. It would only include those members who were judged to 
have met specified conditions. And it would only come about if a majority of 
members were judged to have done so. 
But the Treaty goes on to say that monetary union will come about automatically 
in 1999, for all who meet the conditions. We did not want to exclude ourselves 
from membership; but we could not accept such an automatic commitment. By the 
end of this decade the EC's membership will have changed; the economic 
performance of man of its members may have changed. We cannot tell who the 
members of such a union might be. 
We therefore secured the freedom to make a proper judgement on events. We are as 
free to join if we wish as an other member. We would have to meet the same 
conditions - no more, no less. We will play our full part in the discussions of 
the monetary institutions Europe may create in the 1990s. But we are not obliged 
to join in a single currency if we do not want to. 
  In due course, we will move to the narrow bands of the ERM. 
  We will play our full part in the design and discussion of monetary 
  institutions for Europe. 
  When or if other members of the EC move to a monetary union with a single 
  currency, we will take our own unfettered decision on whether to join. That 
  decision will be taken by the United Kingdom Parliament. 
THE ROUTE TO LOWER TAXES 
Economic growth is created by people's hard work, ingenuity thrift and 
willingness to take risks. An enterprise economy rewards the industrious and 
thrifty We believe that government should not gobble up all the proceeds of 
growth, and that those who create prosperity should enjoy it, through lower 
taxes and more opportunity to build up personal wealth. 
Our policy is therefore to reduce the share of national income taken by the 
public sector. In the mid-1970s, public spending peaked at over 49 per cent of 
our gross national product. In the early 1980s, it peaked at over 47 per cent. 
In this recession, it is peaking at only 43 per cent. We aim to reduce this 
steadily as the recovery gets under way 
Keeping control of public spending will enable us to cut taxes while bringing 
the Government's Budget back towards balance in the years ahead. Excessive 
government borrowing can lead to inflation. Government should always be on guard 
against that danger. However, when demand in the economy is weak, public 
borrowing will tend to rise. 
Because companies pay taxes according to how well they did the previous year, 
the deficit tends to be deepest just as we come out of recession. We must make 
sure that as the economy grows, borrowing slows. 
By bringing tax and spending decisions together in a unified Budget from next 
year, we will make the choices clearer. But lower taxes and a prudent approach 
to borrowing do not mean public spending must fall; quite the reverse. A 
lightly-taxed economy generates more economic growth, and more revenue. High 
taxes kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. In the course of its last five 
years in office, Labour was forced to cut public spending, in real terms. By 
contrast, the Conservatives have been able to raise public spending by nearly a 
quarter in real terms. 
Higher tax rates do not always bring in more money In practice, they can bring 
in less. The Conservative Government has more than halved the top rate of tax. 
Yet top rate taxpayers today provide a bigger share of our tax revenues than 
they did before. Lower taxes have encouraged more people to work harder - not to 
spend their time working out how to avoid penal taxes. 
During the past 13 years we have cut, simplified or abolished a whole range of 
direct taxes. 
  We have cut the basic rate of Income Tax from 33p to 25p, and the top rate 
  from 83p to 40p. 
  We have now announced a new starting Income Tax rate of 20p. 
  We have raised the basic single person's tax allowance by 27 per cent more 
  than would be needed to keep pace with inflation. 
  We have simplified and reduced the burden of taxation on capital. 
  We have cut Corporation Tax from 52 per cent to 33 per cent (and from 42 per 
  cent to 25 per cent for small companies). 
  We have reduced the burden of National Insurance on low earners. 
  We have introduced independent taxation of husbands and wives, giving married 
  women full eligibility for tax allowances. 
  We have introduced new tax incentives for savings. 
  We have abolished several taxes completely including the surcharge on income 
  from savings, the National Insurance Surcharge, Development Land Tax, and 
  Capital Transfer Tax. 
We are the only party that understands the need for low taxation. Labour and the 
Liberals openly advocate increased taxation. Yet lower taxes clearly create a 
more productive economy They also achieve another prime objective of 
Conservative Governments, which is to transfer power from the state to the 
people. 
Labour would: 
  Reverse our cut in the starting rate of Income Tax to 20p. 
  Raise the top rate. 
  Abolish the National Insurance ceiling. 
  Introduce a new savings surcharge. 
  We announced in the Budget an important first step towards a basic Income Tax 
  rate of 20p. By applying a 20p rate to the first £2,000 of taxable income, we 
  have cut taxes for all 25 million taxpayers, and taken the four million on 
  lowest incomes out of 25p tax altogether. 
  We will make further progress towards a basic Income Tax rate of 20p. 
  We will reduce the share of national income taken by the public sector. We 
  will see the budget return towards balance as the economy recovers. 
THE RIGHT TO OWN 
Since 1979, wealth has been spread more widely through the community Home 
ownership, share ownership and the build-up of personal pensions have all 
contributed. Over two-thirds of people live in homes that they own, 10 million 
people own shares, 6 million of them in newly-privatised industries. About 2.5 
million have benefited from tax incentives to encourage employee share schemes. 
And over 4½ million people are now building up their own personal pensions. 
But these freedoms are at risk. 
Labour would: 
  Halt the privatisation programme and threaten the value of shares in 
  privatised industries with renationalisation and new Government controls. 
  Bring back credit rationing, leading to mortgage queues. 
  Turn the pensions market on its head, making pension provision costly and 
  difficult. 
These changes would drive savings overseas and make wealth again the prerogative 
of the few. 
By contrast, we want to do more to encourage the wider distribution of wealth 
throughout society Sustaining not just a home-owning but a capital owning 
democracy is crucial to our vision for the 1990s. We intend to spread the 
ownership of shares, homes, pensions and savings. We will do so through future 
privatisations, help for would-be home owners in council tenancies and further 
encouragement for the spread of personal pensions. We intend to lighten the 
burden of capital taxes and reform the taxation of savings. 
We believe Inheritance Tax is particularly inequitable. It falls only on those 
who do not dispose of their assets seven years or more before their death. It is 
inevitably the case that these tend to be people who are not rich enough to 
engage in high-powered tax planning, or who, for lack of knowledge or advice, 
fail to take the necessary precautionary action. In the Budget, we announced 
that we would take most family businesses out of Inheritance Tax altogether. 
During the new Parliament, we will aim to lessen the burden on families to whom 
home ownership has brought the threat of this erratic tax. 
  As detailed later in this Manifesto, we will aim to bring home ownership, 
  share ownership and personal pensions within the reach of more families. 
  We will continue to reform the taxation of savings, building on the success of 
  PEPs and TESSAs. 
  We will raise the tax threshold for Inheritance Tax so that the homes and 
  savings of an increasing number of our citizens can pass unencumbered from one 
  generation to another. 
  Whenever possible, we will ensure that future privatisations offer 
  opportunities to employees to secure a stake in the ownership of their 
  business. 
  We will encourage companies to make dealing in their own shares easier, 
  especially for small shareholders, and encourage wider share ownership, 
  through, for example, the establishment of 'Share Shops'. 
  We will abolish Stamp Duty on share transactions. 
SETTING THE ECONOMY FREE 
Starting with the abolition of exchange controls in 1979, the Government has 
created new incentives for every part of our economy. 
Manufacturing industry suffered particularly badly from the harm inflicted on 
the British economy by Labour Governments in the 1960s and 1970s. To a far 
greater extent than service industries, it was the victim of militant trades 
unionism, restrictive practices, nationalisation, state intervention, tax 
distortion, planning controls and over-regulation. 
We believe strongly that a vigorous manufacturing sector is essential to a 
healthy British economy Over the past 13 years, we have steadily dismantled 
barriers to its growth. 
The competitiveness and performance of British manufacturing have been 
transformed. Its impressive recovery was recognised by the Confederation of 
British Industry, in its report aptly titled Competing with the World's Best'. 
Manufacturing productivity has risen by more than half since 1979 - faster than 
in any other major industrial country. Over the past 10 years, British 
manufactured exports have grown faster than those of France, Germany the United 
States or even Japan. 
The British motor industry has achieved an astonishing revival. By 1996, Britain 
should again be exporting more cars than we import - for the first time since 
1974. We have given the industry yet more encouragement in the Budget, by 
halving the special tax paid on new cars. 
The British Standard for Quality management has effectively become the 
international standard. But that is only the beginning. We have set up a team of 
senior business people to pursue the idea of a new British Quality Award. 
The City is Europe's greatest financial centre. It contributes £11,000 million 
net to our balance of payments. Financial services employ 12 per cent of our 
workforce. London's capital markets and financial services have grown vigorously 
because they are innovative and highly competitive. We will continue our efforts 
to break down the barriers that prevent them from competing freely throughout 
Europe and in the wider world. 
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is now based in London. It 
puts us in the forefront of encouraging investment in the developing markets of 
Central and Eastern Europe. 
Service industries make a vital contribution to our economy and to our balance 
of payments. Tourism, for example, today employs 1.5 million people, 20% more 
than in 1980. It is an industry which boasts many famous companies - but it is 
also driven by the dynamism of many small firms. We will continue to help them 
by simplifying rules and regulations on business and through the DTI Enterprise 
Initiative and a range of other schemes. 
  We will continue to reduce tax burdens on business, as we have done this year 
  for the motor industry, whenever it is possible to do so. 
  We will abolish unnecessary licences and reduce the need for specific 
  approvals for product design. 
  We will back British companies encountering any discrimination, trade barriers 
  or state subsidies that should no longer exist within the Single Market. 
  We will back the regulators of the financial services industry in their 
  efforts to achieve high standards while keeping the rule books down to 
  manageable size. 
PRIVATISATION 
Competition and private ownership are the most powerful engines of economic 
efficiency, innovation and choice. They lead to the creation of world-class 
companies. 
We have returned to private enterprise two-thirds of the companies once owned by 
the state: 46 businesses employing about 900,000 people. This programme has been 
the model for governments across the whole world. 
The work of liberalising markets which were once monopolised goes on. In 1984 we 
privatised British Telecom but only Mercury was given a licence to carry 
services over fixed links. In 1991 we decided to end this duopoly The UK now has 
one of the most open and dynamic telecommunications markets in the world. 
But much greater economic efficiency is not the only gain. Employees have been 
able to take a direct stake in the newly privatised companies. Millions of 
people have been given the same chance to own a real share in the nation's 
assets. Companies which looked inwards to Whitehall are now listening to their 
customers and shareholders. 
Some activities of government must always be provided in the public sector. But 
in central government, Next Steps Agencies and local government, management is 
increasingly buying-in services from the private sector. Our proposals for 
developing this policy have been set out in the White Papers on 'Competing for 
Quality' in central and local government. 
  We will continue our privatisation programme. British Coal will be returned to 
  the private sector. So will local authority bus companies. We will encourage 
  local authorities to sell their airports. We will end British Rail's monopoly. 
  We will sell certain rail services and franchise others. These proposals are 
  set out later in this Manifesto. 
  The Ports Act 1991 has paved the way for the privatisation of the Trust Ports 
  by competitive tender. Tees and Hartlepool, Tilbury, Medway, Forth and Clyde 
  have already been privatised. 
  We are privatising Northern Ireland Electricity and will privatise the 
  Northern Ireland water and sewage services. We will look for ways of bringing 
  private sector skills into the management of Northern Ireland Railways. 
  We will bring private sector enterprise into the public services by 
  encouraging contracting out and competitive tendering throughout government. 
  We will require all government departments to report annually on their plans 
  for market-testing, and progress in achieving it, in their own services and in 
  those of their associated agencies. 
  We will maintain our programme of compulsory competitive tendering of local 
  authority services. We will ensure that unfair terms are excluded and will 
  discourage investment to protect in- house services when better, more cost 
  effective services are available through the private sector. 
  We will ensure that competitive tendering is extended to white collar local 
  authority services, such as those offered by lawyers, accountants, architects 
  and surveyors. 
  We will tackle all anti-competitive and restrictive practices with vigour. We 
  will introduce new legislation giving stronger powers to deal with cartels. 
DEREGULATION 
We are concerned that at every level of government - in Europe, in Whitehall and 
in local authorities - some regulations may have been adopted in answer to 
legitimate concerns, but without proper regard to their overall impact on 
businesses and individuals. A proper balance needs to be struck between 
essential protection for the public, and over-zealous and intrusive controls 
aimed at the elimination of all conceivable risk. It is wrong that new 
regulations, designed to deal with isolated problems, should interfere with the 
private arrangements of citizens or with reasonable commercial practices that 
have earned broad public acceptance. 
  The compliance costs of new UK and EC regulations must be assessed properly. 
  Existing regulations which are outmoded and burdensome must be simplified or 
  removed. We will give priority to the work of the DTI Deregulation Unit in 
  these areas. 
  We will examine ways in which the uniform scope of regulation could be eased 
  to safeguard traditional local products or practices. 
  We will examine whether certain regulations affecting individual citizens 
  within their own homes could be made advisory, rather than mandatory. 
ENERGY 
Our energy policies have brought the consumer both lower prices and better 
service. We have privatised British Gas and the electricity industry in a way 
that has opened these markets to competition. These policies are now being 
seized upon in Europe as essential extensions of the Single Market. 
Domestic customers are now protected by a price formula, and high standards of 
service are enforced by the independent regulators. For instance, electricity 
disconnections for debt have fallen by 43 per cent since the launch of 
privatisation. 
We have ensured that the safety of employees comes first, and have given 
thousands the opportunity of acquiring a stake in their industry. 
The future of the coal industry depends crucially on the competitiveness of coal 
as a fuel for electricity generation. British Coal has made enormous progress in 
increasing productivity since the end of the 1985 strike - but there is still 
further to go. We will support the efforts of British Coal and its workforce to 
improve the industry's performance. The long term future of the industry lies in 
the private sector. 
We have invested in clean coal technology to safeguard the environment. 
Renewable energy projects have received unprecedented support. North Sea oil and 
gas are enjoying a record expansion thanks to our policies of deregulation and 
low taxation. 
  Safety will remain our highest priority throughout the energy sector. 
  We will continue to encourage competition in energy markets. We will 
  progressively reduce British Gas' monopoly of the retail gas market, to give 
  small users the same rights as big firms. 
  We will privatise British Coal in a way that enables employees to enjoy a 
  stake in the industry. 
  We will increase our support for British Coal Enterprise which promotes 
  economic regeneration in areas affected by the closure of mines, and has 
  successfully assisted 76,000 people in finding new jobs. 
  We will review the future of the nuclear industry in 1994. We are committed to 
  safe and economical nuclear power. The existing strict arrangements for 
  nuclear waste will be maintained. 
  We will maintain a guaranteed market for renewable energy projects and fluid 
  research in this area. 
  We will consult on new building regulations to improve energy use. Together 
  with British Gas and some of the Regional Electricity Companies, we will 
  establish an independent Energy Savings Trust to promote energy efficiency. 
  Our grants scheme for low income households will receive record funding next 
  year. 
SCIENCE AND INNOVATION 
British science has an unrivalled reputation for ground-breaking research. We 
believe in investing in scientific research because it enriches the quality of 
our lives and provides the feedstock of industrial innovation. The science 
budget has grown by 24 per cent in real terms since 1978-9. Increasingly funding 
will reflect the quality of the research output so that the best centres can 
truly be world leaders. 
The Government spends nearly £3,000 million a year on civil research and 
development - at least as high a proportion of national income as the Japanese 
or Americans. And since 1978, British industry's spending on R&D has increased 
by 37 per cent in real terms. 
  We will continue to support our science base to maintain the excellence of our 
  science and to ensure that we produce the skilled technical people we need. 
  We will encourage the transfer of people and technology from universities to 
  businesses and upgrade the LINK scheme, which funds joint research. 
  We will encourage the establishment of centres of technological excellence 
  linking industrial research organisations with universities and polytechnics. 
  We will continue to develop new innovation schemes for small and medium-sized 
  businesses, including the highly-regarded SPUR programme to provide help with 
  the development of new products and processes. 
REGIONAL POLICIES 
In recent years, the United Kingdom has attracted five times as much Japanese 
investment as Germany or France, which powerfully demonstrates that we have 
created the most attractive environment in Europe for investors. Our positive 
policy towards inward investment will be maintained, in contrast to that of the 
TUC and the Labour Party. 
The Government will continue to invest in a strong infrastructure, and boost 
technology expertise in the regions. 
  We will ensure that regional policy is well targeted. 
  We will continue to support all parts of the United Kingdom in their campaigns 
  to attract inward investment. 
  We will give additional emphasis to upgrading skills and technology when 
  allocating funds. 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
Small businesses are the seedcorn of the economy Their numbers have grown by 
more than a third since 1979, while the number of self-employed people has grown 
to over 12 per cent of the workforce. We will continue to recognise the special 
needs of small and medium-sized companies, and to ensure that Government 
delivers useful services to them. 
Our tax regime for small businesses is one of the most favourable in Europe. We 
have raised the VAT threshold every year since 1979 and reduced the small 
companies rate of Corporation Tax from 42 per cent to 25 per cent. 
Training and Enterprise Councils (and Local Enterprise Companies in Scotland) 
have developed a wide range of services for business and enterprise which assist 
over 150,000 small companies each year. We have developed the popular Enterprise 
Initiative, under which 40,000 companies have been helped to buy in outside 
expertise offering key management skills. We now propose to develop this 
initiative further. 
We also propose to help businesses by easing the transfer of commercial 
tenancies. 
  We announced in the Budget new measures to help small businesses, including 
  full relief against Inheritance Tax on most business assets, reductions in 
  business rates and proposals to speed up the payment of outstanding bills. 
  During the new Parliament, we will develop a new Enterprise Service to give 
  small and medium-sized companies help in diagnosing their most important 
  strategic needs. A new Consultancy Brokerage Service will supply information 
  to small companies. We will also develop a Technology Audit which will provide 
  small firms with a plan for change. And we will continue to support Total 
  Quality Management consultancies. 
  TECs and LECs will be closely involved in developing and implementing this new 
  initiative. 
The independent Law Commission has recommended that a commercial tenant should 
in general be freed from any future liability under a lease when he assigns away 
his interest under it. We will consider how this principle could be put into 
effect for new commercial leases. 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
Consumers want choice, quality and value for money Competition only works 
effectively if consumers have the information they need to make sensible 
decisions. 
Our food safety policy promotes consumer choice and consumer safety We 
introduced the 1990 Food Safety Act to ensure the highest standards of food 
hygiene. 
  We will introduce legislation designed to give consumers confidence that what 
  they purchase is properly described - and that adequate compensation is 
  offered where these requirements are not met. 
  We will enable the courts to override unfair terms in contracts and improve 
  our powers to deal with rogue traders. 
  We will ensure that guarantees mean what they say, and that manufacturers or 
  importers share responsibility with the people who sell their goods. 
  We will tighten up the rules on holiday brochures and contracts, and introduce 
  a 'cooling-off' period into timeshare contracts. 
  We will introduce legislation to simplify trade mark registration and extend 
  the rights they confer. 
  We will enforce science-based controls on the use of chemicals in food 
  production, and will maintain our policy of open access to information on 
  pesticide safety. 
  We will improve standards of food labelling in close consultation with 
  consumer representatives. 
CHOICE AND THE CHARTER
The Citizen's Charter is the most far-reaching programme ever devised to improve 
quality in public services. It addresses the needs of those who use public 
services, extends people's rights, requires services to set clear standards - 
and to tell the public how far those standards are met. 
The Citizen's Charter: 
  widens popular choice; 
  helps people to exercise that choice in a properly informed way; 
  expects all public services to put the customer first; 
  promotes the challenge of competition within the public sector; 
  requires clear performance standards to be set and for services to be measured 
  against them; 
  insists on a proper response to complaints and on action to set right the 
  problems behind them. 
The Charter will be at the centre of government's decision-making throughout the 
1990s. No one doubts the professionalism of the vast majority of public 
servants. But too often the system's outdated working methods and attitudes 
prevent them from giving their best. The Charter's commitment to modern, open 
services will help them to win the respect that good service deserves. 
In less than a year since the White Paper, 18 detailed Charters have been 
published. Each sets out tough new standards and gives new information and 
rights to the public. Each will be revised regularly to check on progress, and 
raise standards higher. But, already results are clear. 
  In hospitals, from April, every out-patient will have a fixed appointment time 
  and our guarantee of maximum waiting times for operations will be steadily 
  improved. 
  On council estates every tenant will have the right to call in a private 
  contractor if the council fails to do a minor repair. 
  In schools, all parents will have the right to a report on their child's 
  performance and details on that of the school. 
Rights such as these should not have been denied to the public. The Citizen's 
Charter, steadily but surely, is changing all that. 
KNOWLEDGE, STANDARDS, CHOICE 
The next Conservative Government will carry the Charter still further. There 
will be more information about standards and performance; clear standards set 
within public services which are still shrouded in mystery; more choice built 
into public services and proper complaints procedures introduced. Many of these 
are outlined later in the Manifesto under Education, Health, Local Government 
and Transport. Here are a few examples from the programme for the next two 
years: 
  The Audit Commission will be able to publish league tables of performance 
  including each local council and health authority so that people can compare 
  the quality of service. 
  We will ensure that inspection reports are published and widely available. All 
  councils will have to respond in public to criticism from auditors. 
  We will introduce a new 'Charterline' that people with questions or problems 
  with a public service will be able to ring. 
  We will require British Rail to tighten its targets for reliability and 
  punctuality on all lines, and report monthly to passengers on how it is doing. 
  London Underground will publish its own Charter. 
  We will expect Post Offices and Job Centres to set out standards of service 
  and levels of achievement. 
  A new Charter Mark award will give recognition to those parts of the public 
  service that best meet Charter standards. 
  British Rail and London Underground are introducing compensation systems for 
  travellers. 
  We will review the powers of the Local Government Ombudsman to ensure that 
  findings of maladministration are properly dealt with by all local 
  authorities. We will consult on a new Lay Adjudicators scheme to help the 
  public resolve difficulties and disputes. 
We will extend competition and accountability in public services. Those who 
provide public services will have to prove they can give the right quality at 
the right cost. 
  We will extend compulsory competitive tendering to local authority housing 
  management, and examine how to apply it to white-collar services. We will act 
  to ensure that private firms bidding to improve local authority public 
  services are not obstructed by unscrupulous practices in councils or by unfair 
  contracts. We will pursue more competitive tendering for central government 
  services. 
  We will encourage the wider use of performance pay inside the Civil Service 
  and in other parts of the public service. A link between a person's effort and 
  his or her pay is a powerful means of improving performance. 
  Civil servants dealing with the public will normally identify themselves by 
  name. 
  We will toughen inspection of key public services where choice and competition 
  must inevitably be limited. We will introduce, for the first time, regular 
  independent inspection of all schools. 
  We will act to ensure that the inspectorates of police, fire, probation, and 
  social services, together with any new inspectorates that are established, 
  will be truly independent of the service which they inspect. 
  We will ensure that the reports from these systematic regular inspections are 
  published. More lay inspectors, drawn from other professions and from the 
  general public, will bring fresh insights into service improvement. 
  We will publish later this year new proposals for the inspection of social 
  work in England, setting up arrangements for systematic independent inspection 
  of all care services and every local authority social services department. 
  Inspections of local authority homes will be carried out by teams that contain 
  lay inspectors and are independent of the influence of the management of the 
  homes. 
All of the privatised utilities have a specialist regulator who is responsible 
for promoting competition, reviewing prices and protecting the public interest. 
We have introduced legislation to increase the powers of these regulators to the 
level of the strongest. 
  We are ensuring that the regulators have the powers they need to promote 
  competition and safeguard the interests of the customer by controlling price 
  increases. We will increase competition in the gas and water markets. 
  We are giving the regulators powers to set standards of service, covering such 
  matters as fixed appointment times for service calls. 
THE POST OFFICE 
The Post Office is among the best in Europe for speed and reliability of its 
letter services. Traffic has grown by 50 per cent in a decade in which it has 
operated without a subsidy Last year the first-class letter service achieved 
record improvements in reliability The local post office is a vital and valued 
feature of the rural community. 
In 1981 we introduced private competition for deliveries costing over £1. This 
led to the rapid growth of the private courier industry with substantial 
benefits to business users. We believe that further benefits to consumers would 
flow from additional competition. 
  We are committed to maintaining a nation wide letter service with delivery to 
  every address in the United Kingdom, within a uniform structure of prices, and 
  with a nation-wide network of post offices. 
  We will legislate to set up a new independent regulator to advise on issues 
  affecting Post Office customers, and on the progressive introduction of 
  competition. 
  We will set performance targets for the Post Office and ensure they are 
  published in all offices, together with results achieved. 
  We will ensure there is effective redress for customers where services fail. 
  We will lower the limit on the Post Office monopoly much closer to the level 
  of the first class stamp. 
  We will provide improved scope for contractors to carry mail to final delivery 
  offices. 
  We will consider requests to license limited specialist services to compete 
  within the Post Office monopoly. 
WHITEHALL & WESTMINSTER 
Whitehall must move with the times. It is over a decade since the last major 
restructuring of the departments of government. Since then: 
  Two-thirds of the state industrial sector has been privatised, transferring 
  about 900,000 jobs to the private sector. 
  Government has reduced the burden of regulation and the need for central 
  bureaucracy 
  Civil Service manpower has been reduced by almost a quarter. 
  Many of the functions of government have been devolved from Whitehall. 
  The Citizen's Charter programme is bringing new quality to public services. 
We will continue to reorganise central government in tune with its modern role, 
while devolving and contracting-out executive functions. We want to ensure that 
the drive to save money to reduce bureaucracy and raise quality is powerfully 
led from the centre of government. 
  We will give a Cabinet Minister responsibility for the Citizen's Charter 
  programme and reforming the Civil Service, taking charge of the Citizen's 
  Charter Unit, Efficiency Unit, the programme for creating Agencies and the 
  Public Competition and Purchasing Unit. This will make it easier to raise 
  quality and efficiency in government and see that contracting-out and 
  market-testing are energetically pursued. 
  We intend to create a new department, under a Cabinet Minister, with 
  responsibility for broadcasting, arts, sport, tourism, the national heritage 
  and the film industry. This department will aim to encourage private sector 
  enterprise in all these fields. The National Lottery and the Millennium Fund 
  (detailed later in this Manifesto) will also bring new responsibilities to 
  government in these areas. 
  We will transfer the core responsibilities of the Department of Energy to the 
  Department of Trade and Industry and responsibilities for energy efficiency to 
  the Department of the Environment, ending the need for a separate department 
  Small businesses are the seedcorn of our future prosperity We believe the 
  Department of Trade and Industry should take over responsibility for them. We 
  also want to strengthen the links between the DTI and the highly successful 
  Training and Enterprise Councils. 
  Responsibility for overseeing all financial services will be brought together 
  in the Treasury, in line with the practice adopted in most other advanced 
  countries. 
  New programmes for regenerating our inner cities are outlined in this 
  Manifesto. Responsibilities will be brought together in the Department of the 
  Environment. 
  We are determined to ensure that women in the work-force realise their full 
  potential. We will transfer from the Home Office to the Department of 
  Employment the lead responsibility for co-ordinating government policy on 
  issues of particular concern to women. 
OPEN GOVERNMENT 
Government has traditionally been far too reluctant to provide information. This 
secrecy extends from the processes of Cabinet Government to schools which refuse 
to release exam results. Under the Citizen's Charter, a great deal more 
information is now being made available on the services provided by government. 
We have also: 
  replaced the catch-all provisions of the 1911 Official Secrets Act with 
  narrower offences depending on specific tests of the harm likely to be caused 
  by disclosure, while giving special protection to vital information relating 
  to our national security; 
  introduced rights to check certain personal records held on computer, and 
  supported new rights of access to a range of government records; 
  committed ourselves to a public right of access to information about the 
  environment, including water supply, air quality dumping at sea and 
  radioactive substances; 
  made available more reports on matters of public concern such as food safety 
  and industrial risks. 
We intend to carry forward this move towards greater openness. 
  We will review the 80 or so statutory restrictions which exist on the 
  disclosure of information - retaining only those needed to protect privacy and 
  essential confidentiality. 
  We will seek to provide greater access to personal records held by government. 

  We will be less secretive about the workings of government. For example, when 
  the Committees of the Cabinet are reconstituted after the election we will, 
  for the first time, set out their names and membership. We will update and - 
  for the first time - publish the guidance for Ministers on procedure. 
THE WORKINGS OF PARLIAMENT 
It is not just Whitehall that must change. Parliament, too, has to keep its 
working methods under review to make sure it attracts the best people to the 
service of their country and uses their talents to best effect. 
  We will propose appropriate Parliamentary reforms to ensure that the House of 
  Commons conducts its business more efficiently and effectively, taking into 
  account the benefits of modern technology, the increasing constituency demands 
  upon Members of Parliament and the need to attract more women to stand for 
  election. 
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL
Conservatives believe that high standards in education and training are the key 
to personal opportunity and national success. We believe in partnership with 
parents, choice in schools and a good grounding in the basic skills all children 
need to make a success of their lives. We are committed to widening 
opportunities without compromising academic standards. We will continue to 
expand higher education and training. We will reinforce the rights of the 
individual in the world of work, and break down artificial barriers to 
advancement. By extending opportunity and arming people with the power to 
choose, we will give valuable freedoms and a powerful spur to achievement. 
SCHOOLS, PUPILS & PARENTS 
We are now seeing real improvements in our education system. One in four young 
people goes on to higher education; at the beginning of the 1980s, it was only 
one in eight. Sixty per cent of 16 year-olds stay on in full-time education, up 
from only 40 per cent in 1979. And we have embarked on the most important and 
wide-ranging reforms since the 1940s. 
For the first time in our history, we will soon have a National Curriculum which 
will require all the main school subjects to be covered thoroughly The testing 
of 7 year-olds is well under way and tests for older children are now being 
developed. Starting this September, GCSE courses will be steadily integrated 
with the National Curriculum. 
Under the Parent's Charter, all schools will have to provide at least one 
written report on the progress of each child each year. Information on the 
performance of all local schools will be given to parents, enabling them to 
exercise choice more effectively 
We believe all parents have the right to choice in education - not only those 
who can afford school fees. Young people differ in their interests and 
aptitudes, and we need a range of schools to offer them the best opportunities. 
We have always fought to maintain diversity in education, protecting the right 
of local people to preserve their grammar schools, and defending independent 
schools against mindless Labour attacks. And we have always valued the important 
contribution made by the churches to our children's education. 
We have further increased diversity by: 
  Giving schools control over their own budgets and encouraging new types of 
  school. 
  Allowing schools to become independent of local councils, by applying for 
  Grant-Maintained status if the parents involved so wish. By mid-1992, over 200 
  GM schools will be up and running. 
  Creating a number of highly popular City Technology Colleges. 
  Launching the highly successful initiative under which schools are able to bid 
  directly for the resources to become Technology Schools. 
We intend to take all these initiatives further and offer parents more choice in 
the new Parliament. Popular schools will be allowed to expand, and more schools 
will be able to apply for technology funding. We will make it easier for small 
schools to enjoy the benefits of GM status by grouping together. 
  We will complete the introduction of the National Curriculum offering 10 
  subjects at a nationally-defined standard - English, Mathematics, Science, 
  History, Geography, Technology, Art, Music, PE and, in secondary schools, a 
  foreign language. 
  Regular and straightforward tests will be in place for all 7, 11 and 14 
  year-olds by 1994. 
  GCSE at age 16 will be integrated into the National Curriculum, with a new A+ 
  grade to test the most able. The majority of marks will come from a written 
  exam. 
  We will continue to encourage the creation of nursery places. For the first 
  time, over 50 per cent of three and four year olds have places either in 
  nursery or primary schools. 
  Full information will be published annually about the performance of all local 
  schools in each area. 
  Independent inspection of schools will provide parents with straightforward 
  reports on their child's school, together with an action plan from governors 
  to remedy any weaknesses. 
  Popular schools which are over subscribed will he given the resources to 
  expand. 
  GM schools will be able to change their character if that is what parents 
  clearly want and the change fits in with the wider needs of the local area. 
  The Technology Schools Initiative will be expanded across the country. 
  Existing schools which opt for GM status will be able to emulate City 
  Technology Colleges and attract private technology sponsorship. 
  We will maintain the Assisted Places scheme, which gives access to independent 
  education to many families who could not otherwise afford it. 
  We will ensure that the partnership between the state and the churches in 
  education is maintained and strengthened. 
  We will enable small schools to apply for GM status in groups. 
  We will pay particular attention to raising educational standards in areas of 
  deprivation in our cities. 
TEACHING 
We are determined to reinforce the professionalism of teachers and the esteem in 
which they are held. We have created an independent Teachers' Pay Review Body We 
accepted in full its first recommendations; nearly half of all teachers are now 
earning over £20,000 a year. We will press ahead with regular appraisal of 
teachers to encourage high standards and develop professional skills. 
As a first step in the reform of teacher training, postgraduate students will 
spend much more time in school classrooms, learning their skills under the 
practised eye of senior teachers. 
It is vital that the education system should attract back women who have taken a 
career break to raise a family Through grants to local authorities, we are 
financing schemes to introduce more flexible working practices - such as 
job-sharing. 
  We will undertake reform of the teacher training system to make it more 
  effective in developing classroom skills. 
  We will develop measures to encourage women with family responsibilities to 
  enter or return to teaching. 
AFTER 16 
We believe that young people should be free to choose between college, 
work-based training and sixth form studies. We are giving further education 
colleges and sixth form colleges in England and Wales autonomy, free from 
council control. We also value our school sixth forms, and will ensure they 
retain their place in the new system. And we will allow them to attract older 
students as well. FE colleges will continue to receive support for adult 
education, while local authorities will retain the resources to respond to local 
demand for leisure courses. 
We will defend the well-respected A-level examinations, which Labour would 
destroy We will continue to encourage participation m AS examinations. We will 
also continue to develop new high-quality National Vocational Qualifications, 
and introduce a new post-16 diploma which recognises achievement in both 
vocational and academic courses. 
  We will develop an Advanced Diploma which can be earned by students pursuing 
  either academic or vocational courses, and a new General National Vocational 
  Qualification. 
  We intend to allow school sixth forms to open their doors if they wish to 
  older students, and to accept training credits or fees from them. 
  From April next year, further education and sixth form colleges will be 
  independent of local government control. 
  Mature students will enjoy a wider choice of courses. 
HIGHER EDUCATION 
Britain maintains the best university system in Europe. We have also developed a 
thriving network of polytechnics, whose student numbers have increased nearly 
sixfold since the end of the 1960s. 
By the year 2000, one in three young people will follow full-time higher 
education courses. Meanwhile, the number of mature entrants to higher education 
has risen by 65 per cent since 1979. And our universities are attracting 
increasing numbers of foreign students. 
Despite this huge expansion, our students enjoy one of the most generous support 
systems in the world. The introduction of student loans has given students 30 
per cent more money for their living costs than the former system of grants 
alone. The new system will steadily reduce the proportion of students' living 
costs that their parents are expected to meet. 
  We will continue to expand the number of students in higher education. We are 
  abolishing the artificial 'binary line' between universities and polytechnics. 

  We are putting in place new mechanisms to ensure that academic standards are 
  maintained in higher education. 
  We will continue to provide generous support for students and to expand our 
  student loans commitment. 
THE TRAINING REVOLUTION 
A training revolution is under way in Britain. The Government's job is to create 
a framework within which men and women of all ages can develop skills, gain 
qualifications and shape their own futures. 
We have already brought the world of work and the world of school into closer 
harmony Government and industry are working together. Employers already spend 
over £20,000 million a year on training. Government spending on training has 
increased 2½ times in real terms since 1979, to £2,800 million. The Government's 
effort is being channelled through the 82 new Training and Enterprise Councils 
(and the Local Enterprise Companies in Scotland) - the most significant peace 
time partnership between government and industry this century. 
  'Compacts' have resulted in many young people working to goals for attainment 
  and attendance in school. In return, they are guaranteed a job with training - 
  or training leading to a job. 
  This year, two million students will participate in the Technical and 
  Vocational Education Initiative. 
  Investors in People is the new national standard for companies making a 
  commitment to training. TECs play an important role in helping companies 
  attain it. 
  Employer-led TECs and LECs are delivering Government-funded training 
  programmes which reflect industry's understanding of local needs. 
  Industry is working closely with the National Council for Vocational 
  Qualifications. 
  The CBI's training targets for Britain's workforce demonstrate a new 
  partnership between business and education. 
75 per cent of 16 year-olds stay on in full-time education or Youth Training 
schemes, up from 46 per cent in 1979. Since 1983, over 3 million young people 
have taken up Youth Training places. And 82 per cent go into jobs or further 
education when they complete YT. 
Now we are offering young people aged 16 and 17 vouchers they can use to buy 
approved courses of education or training, and which will put the power of 
choice in their hands. 
In 1988, we launched Employment Training, the largest programme of its kind in 
Europe, which has since helped 1.2 million people. While local programmes are 
the responsibility of the TECs, the Government guarantees the offer of help to 
particular groups of unemployed. 
Last year, we launched the new Employment Action programme, which will help more 
than 61,000 people in a full year. This is a new addition to a range of measures 
which include Jobclubs, the Job Interview Guarantee Scheme and other tested 
methods of helping unemployed people back to work. 
We are also supporting individual training effort. Since 1988, when we launched 
Career Development Loans (interest-free for up to 15 months), over 25,000 people 
have benefited. Last year's Budget gave tax relief on training fees - a boost to 
the 250,000 people a year who finance their own training. Now, with the TECs, we 
intend to introduce new financial help for career and training guidance. 
  By the end of the new Parliament, the new system of National Vocational 
  Qualifications should cover virtually every occupation in the economy. The 
  CBI's training targets envisage 80 per cent of young people reaching NVQ level 
  2 by the end of the Parliament. 
  We intend to make training credits available to all 16 year-olds and 17 
  year-olds within the lifetime of the new Parliament. The TECs will continue to 
  be responsible for the YT programme for this age group. 
  We will continue to finance training programmes for the long-term un-employed 
  and those who face particular difficulties. We will launch with the TECs a new 
  initiative, giving people a voucher with which they can buy a 'skill check', 
  providing assessment and guidance on how to make the most of their working 
  lives. 
WORKERS AND UNIONS 
Over the past 13 years, we have legislated to lift regulatory burdens from the 
shoulders of those who create jobs in Britain. To industry's relief, we shunned 
the job-destroying European Social Charter. And we reject Labour's 
job-destroying notion of a national minimum wage. 
We have also legislated five times to transform industrial relations, returning 
power from militants to ordinary union members. As a result, the number of days 
lost each year through strikes has fallen from an average 12.9 million in the 
1970s to less than a million last year - the lowest figure since records began a 
century ago. 
Labour would disrupt industrial peace by weakening the power of management and 
the courts. They propose to take away the courts' most important sanction - the 
power to take over a union's assets. 
Sympathy strikes would be legalised by Labour, and employers would be prevented 
from dismissing strikers who broke their contracts. 
The workers' rights we believe in are those which enhance individuals' status 
and opportunities. We believe people should be informed and consulted by 
employers about issues which affect their work. No one should be allowed to 
deduct trade union fees automatically from an employee's pave without written 
authorisation. Individuals must be given greater rights to belong to the union 
of their choice. 
We also believe strongly that employers, employees and customers should not have 
their lives and businesses disrupted by wildcat strikes. In the new Parliament, 
we will legislate to enforce and enhance these rights. 
  We will require employers to give everyone who works for them for more than 
  eight hours a week a clear 'written statement of their terms and conditions of 
  employment. 
  We will make automatic deduction of union membership dues without 'written 
  authorisation unlawful. 
  We will take measures to give individuals greater freedom in choosing a union. 

  We will legislate to require that all pre- strike ballots are postal and 
  subject to independent scrutiny, and that at least seven days' notice of a 
  strike is given after a ballot. 
  People who use public services will have the right to restrain the disruption 
  of those services by unlawful industrial action. 
A SHARE IN THE FUTURE 
We also believe that people at work should be helped to build security for 
themselves and their families. Employees should be given every opportunity to 
acquire a stake in the business for which they work. We have ruled that 
executive share option schemes may grant options at a discount only if the 
employer also runs an all-employee scheme. 
Saving for a pension reduces reliance on the state. We welcome the provision of 
occupational schemes covering over 11 million workers. There are already 
important safeguards, which we have improved, for the rights of members in such 
schemes. But we believe that a full review of the arrangements is now needed. We 
also believe that new freedoms for scheme members will strengthen accountability 
and benefit investors. 
  We will establish a review of the framework of law and regulation within which 
  occupational schemes operate. 
  We will give every member of an occupational scheme the right to an annual 
  statement of the value of their savings. 
  In addition we will examine ways of giving those who retire with lump sum 
  payments more choice as to how their savings are invested. 
WOMEN AND OPPORTUNITY 
A higher proportion of women go out to work in Britain than in an other EC 
country except Denmark. Many women choose to work part-time, and our policies 
have encouraged the development of part-time work within a framework which 
safeguards employees from exploitation. 
Throughout Europe, the UK is recognised to have the most comprehensive 
legislation to combat sex discrimination. We are also committed to breaking down 
artificial barriers to women's advancement based on prejudice or lack of 
imagination. As an employer, government must continue to set an example. 
The tax relief we have introduced on training fees is constructed to ensure that 
non-tax payers - who include many married women - will be able to benefit, too. 
Many Training and Enterprise Councils already have specific plans to help women 
trainees. We will involve them further in helping employers to help with 
childcare. 
We believe mothers should be treated equally by government, whether they work 
outside the home or not. We are fully committed to maintaining the real value of 
child benefit. And we will act where a push by government is needed to stimulate 
the provision of childcare. 
All employers who meet childcare costs can set these off against their liability 
for corporation tax. In addition, we have relieved employees from paying income 
tax on the benefit of workplace nurseries. 
After-school childcare is an area of particular importance to many working 
mothers. We will introduce a new initiative to encourage the provision of 
after-school facilities by schools, employers and voluntary groups across the 
country. 
  The Government will amend the law relating to the employment rights of 
  pregnant women to give effect to the EC Directive on Pregnant Workers. This 
  addition to our already extensive legal provision will give a right to at 
  least 14 weeks' maternity leave and protection against dismissal on grounds of 
  pregnancy. 
  We will take forward our public appointments initiative. Departments will 
  publish plans for between a quarter and a half of public appointments to be 
  held by women by 1996. 
  We will ensure that all parts of government adopt a strategic approach to the 
  employment and development of women staff. We will encourage them to 
  participate in the Opportunity 2000 initiative. 
  We will continue to oppose EC measures which would discourage part-time 
  employment, valued by so many women. 
  We will encourage all TECs to adopt plans to help women trainees have equal 
  access to training opportunities. 
  We will introduce a new grant, paid through TECs, to help employers, voluntary 
  groups or schools to set up after-school care and holiday arrangements. We 
  will ensure that schools are free to participate. 
FREEDOM UNDER THE LAW
The Conservative Party has always stood for the protection of the citizen and 
the defence of the rule of law. Society is entitled to a sense of security; 
individuals to peace of mind; the guardians of that peace to our whole-hearted 
support. Our policies on law and order, and the rights of individuals, are 
designed to protect the people of this country and their way of life. 
Britain experiences less violent crime than many comparable countries. But crime 
has continued to rise in Britain. And the challenge for the 1990s is to step up 
the fight against lawlessness and violence, so that our citizens can live free 
from fear. 
We must continue to ensure that the sentence fits the crime - with long 
sentences for dangerous criminals, and fines and a tougher regime for punishment 
outside prison available as an alternative for less serious crime. And we must 
maintain confidence in our legal system. 
We must tackle crime at its roots. Two-thirds of the offences dealt with by our 
courts are committed by only seven per cent of those convicted. Most of these 
constant offenders started down the path of crime while still of school age. 
We have launched a reform of our prisons, improving the prospect that those who 
serve custodial sentences will not return to crime. 
But above all we must remember that it is our policemen and women who are in the 
front line of the battle. To combat crime effectively the police need the full 
support of the Government and the public. 
POLICE AND THE COMMUNITY 
We Conservatives can be proud of our record in supporting the police. Since 1979 
we have increased spending on the police by 74 per cent in real terms. Uniformed 
manpower has increased by 16,000 and civilian manpower by 12,000. We have 
launched a campaign to recruit 10,000 Special Constables. 
Over the next few years we want to see a major reform which will help provide 
what the public wants and needs: a visible, local police presence. 
We will be encouraging police forces to develop local Community Policing, to 
link the police more closely with the communities they protect. The Metropolitan 
Police will be reorganised on this basis by the spring of 1993. Two-thirds of 
English and Welsh forces are already preparing similar plans. Pilot schemes 
suggest they can add greatly to the citizen's sense of security and build 
support for the police. 
Community Policing will involve local residents, listen to their views and 
engage their help in the fight against crime. It will mean: 
  smaller police units with officers serving the same area for longer. That way, 
  people can really get to know their local police officers; 
  each police force devolving its management and operational control to local 
  units, and streamlining its chain of command; 
  getting police back on the beat, and in close contact with the neighbourhoods 
  under their care. 
It will be supported by an extension of Neighbourhood Watch schemes, which are 
vital in deterring theft and burglaries. 
Public confidence in the police is enhanced when people know what they can 
expect from their local police force, and when outsiders are let into the 
process of inspecting how they work. At least five police forces are already 
leading the way with charters setting out their targets. 
  We are continuing to increase police numbers. There will be 1,000 extra police 
  officers this year. 
  We will continue to give the police the support and resources they need to 
  carry out their duties effectively and efficiently. 
  We will be seeking the nation-wide introduction of Community Policing. 
  We will encourage civilianisation as a means of freeing police officers for 
  operational duties. 
  We will encourage the extension of Neighbourhood Watch to more residential 
  areas. 
  We will continue to increase the Special Constabulary, which has seen a rise 
  in recruitment this year of 10 per cent. 
  We want each police force to produce a charter telling local people, for 
  example, how quickly the police will aim to respond to emergency calls. 
  We will introduce lay inspectors with management experience into the police 
  inspectorate. 
PROTECTORS AND VICTIMS 
We look to the police to protect us. They risk their lives to do so. Police 
officers are entitled to the protection of the community they serve. Those who 
indulge in the shameful practice of 'ambushing', or seeking to frustrate the 
work of the emergency services, deserve to face severe penalties. We welcome the 
findings of a study by the Home Office and Crown Prosecution Service which shows 
that assaults on policemen attract consistently heavier penalties. But we will 
examine ways of introducing further protection for the police. 
We must also pay special attention to the needs of the victims of crime, in the 
courts and in rebuilding their lives. We have increased funding for Victim 
Support. 
The number of people directly affected by violent and sexual crime remains 
relatively small. But fear of crime can have a devastating effect on people's 
lives, and particularly on women's lives. We are determined to reduce this fear. 

  We will set up a working party to examine what more can be done to protect the 
  police and members of other emergency services from assault. 
  We will encourage victims to report sexual offences by giving them statutory 
  anonymity 
  Under our Safer Cities programme, there are 124 schemes to improve street 
  lighting, which has been shown to reduce the fear of crime significantly. 
  Women-only taxi services are being encouraged under the same Safer Cities 
  programme. 
PENALTIES AND PREVENTION 
Our armoury of criminal law and penalties requires constant review. We have just 
introduced a new law specifically aimed at the so-called 'joy-rider'. This 
places the responsibility for dangerous driving, damage, injury or death 
following from the taking of a vehicle squarely on the shoulders of those in it. 

Even where 'joy-riding' is not involved, causing death through dangerous or 
drink driving is a very serious offence. We believe that the maximum sentence 
for such a crime should reflect its gravity. 
Squatting is nothing less than the seizure of another's property without 
consent. Having consulted widely on the subject, we have decided to extend the 
criminal law dealing with squatting. 
Illegal camping by gypsies or other travellers can affect the lives of whole 
communities. We believe that this problem must be tackled. 
We are concerned about the small but persistent minority, particularly of young 
people, who re-offend while already on bail. We have announced new measures to 
deter them from repeated crime. 
Young people who find themselves on probation for shop-lifting, vandalism or 
petty thuggery should be shown where the path of crime may lead. They should be 
given a brief personal experience of the nature of prison life. 
  'Joy-riders' will now face prison sentences of up to 5 years, unlimited fines 
  and unlimited driving bans. 
  We will extend the maximum sentence for causing death through dangerous or 
  drink driving. 
  We will create a new criminal offence of squatting, to give greater protection 
  to the owners and occupants of shops, commercial premises, houses and flats. 
  The 1968 Caravan Sites Act will be reviewed with the aim of reducing the 
  nuisance of illegal encampments. 
  As part of a community sentence, young offenders will be taken to see what 
  life is really like inside one of our prisons - a sobering experience for 
  them. 
  We will introduce a new police power to make an arrest for breach of police 
  bail. 
  We will give the courts the statutory power to increase sentences for those 
  who offend while on bail. 
  We will increase the number of bail hostel places, to enable closer 
  supervision of those on bail. 
  We will mount a drive against school truancy, and set up a Task Force to find 
  the best ways of co-ordinating the work of local agencies helping young people 
  at risk of becoming offenders. 
REFORMING OUR PRISONS 
Prisons should be places which are austere but decent, providing a busy and 
positive regime which prepares prisoners for their ultimate release. 
We have been reversing the Labour Party's neglect of the prison service in the 
1970s. Since 1985, 14 new prisons have been opened 7 more will open over the 
next two years. The end of overcrowding is now in sight. 
We have already taken steps to implement the key recommendations of the Woolf 
report on the future of our prisons. We will bring private sector skills in to 
enhance efficiency and increase value for money 
We have put out to tender the contract for prison escort services, an approach 
which has worked well in other countries. The first contract for a privately 
managed remand centre has been awarded. 
  We will sustain our massive prison reform and building programme. 
  A reconstruction programme will end the degrading need for 'slopping out' by 
  the end of 1994. 
  We will reorganise prisoners' education, training and work opportunities. 
  We will establish the Prison Service as a separate agency, whose director will 
  have the clear responsibility for day-to day operations. The Home Secretary 
  will remain ministerially accountable to Parliament for prison policy. 
  We will increase the use of private sector management skills. 
OUR LEGAL SYSTEM 
As a free society we must have a justice system that is fair, accessible and 
responsive to the citizen. 
We have introduced new powers for the Court of Appeal to increase sentences for 
crime. And in response to public concern about a small but significant number of 
miscarriages of justice, we have appointed a Royal Commission to review aspects 
of the criminal justice system, including the conduct of investigations, the 
handling of forensic evidence, and the powers of the Court of Appeal. 
We have already reduced the opportunity for abuse by our introduction of 
tape-recorded interviews of suspects by the police. At the same time, we are 
concerned that police investigations should not be made more difficult by the 
misuse of certain rights. 
We have already introduced a wide range of reforms following our Civil Justice 
Review. Extending the jurisdiction of the County Courts has helped speed up 
justice. The success of the small claims system in these courts has shown that 
simplified procedures can enable people to conduct their own cases or rely on a 
lay adviser. We have also introduced a reform which will give people more choice 
as to who represents them legally in court. 
We are committed to enabling people with limited means to have access to legal 
services. We are determined to ensure that these services are delivered 
efficiently, in a way which provides the best value for money. 
The principles of the Citizen's Charter are being applied to our legal system. 
We will shortly be publishing a Courts Charter. 
We are overhauling the way in which family matters are handled in our courts. 
The new family code will be applied by magistrates and judges especially trained 
in family law. 
Our Sunday Trading laws have come into question as a result of a possible 
conflict with Article 30 of the Treaty of Rome. This matter is now before the 
European Court of Justice, and we are awaiting a judgement. The Government 
brought forward proposals in 1986 to reform the shopping laws, but Parliament 
was not able to agree a conclusion. Parliament will be given the opportunity to 
consider this issue again. 
  We will introduce a major Criminal Justice Bill in the lifetime of the new 
  Parliament. 
  We will extend the types of cases which can be handled by the County Courts in 
  a simplified way. 
  We will consult on a Lay Adjudicators scheme to make it easier for citizens to 
  settle disputes with service providers. 
  We will provide a code of family law that will continue to underpin the 
  institution of marriage, give priority to the welfare of the child, and 
  emphasise the primary responsibility of parents for the welfare of children 
  and the family. 
  We will bring forward proposals for reform of the Sunday Trading laws once the 
  legal position has been made clear by the European Court of Justice. 
PORNOGRAPHY, PRIVACY, LIBEL 
We have the toughest anti-pornography laws in Western Europe, and we will keep 
them that way. 
Every year, about 300,000 people - mostly women - request advice and assistance 
in dealing with obscene or malicious phone calls. We intend to do more to deter 
this harassment, in conjunction with the telecommunications industry. 
The Press Complaints Commission is now in operation, and we will monitor its 
work carefully to see if self-regulation succeeds. 
The public's dislike of unprincipled press behaviour has sometimes been 
expressed in the award of erratically large libel damages. While this is 
understandable, it has led to an inordinate number of successful appeals. We 
therefore propose to simplify the law relating to libel in the light of the 
recommendations of the Neill Committee. 
  British domestic controls on pornography will remain in place even after the 
  completion of the Single European Market. 
  We will increase the maximum penalties for making obscene or malicious phone 
  calls. 
  We propose to allow judges to settle the level of damages in libel cases where 
  the defendant offers to pay to make amends. 
COMMUNITY RELATIONS 
Racial harmony demands restraint on all sides, and a tolerant understanding of 
the legitimate views of others. 
Everybody, regardless of ethnic background, religious or personal belief, has 
the right to go about his or her life free from the threat of intimidation and 
assault. We are determined that everyone lawfully settled in this country should 
enjoy the full range of opportunities in our society That requires openness on 
the part of the majority and, on the part of the ethnic minorities themselves, a 
determination to participate fully in the life of the wider community. 
The Home Office invests £129 million in grants designed to encourage those 
running public services to ensure that people from ethnic minorities can enjoy 
the full range of public services - such as health, housing and social services. 
We believe that these grants would be more effective if responsibility was 
transferred to those Departments which can make best use of the money. 
  Racial and sexual discrimination have no place in our society. We have given 
  the police stronger powers to deal with racial hatred. We will continue to 
  ensure that the full force of the law is used to deal with racial attacks. 
  We will transfer the education share of the Home Office's 'Section 11' money 
  to the Department of Education, to focus help on those from ethnic minority 
  backgrounds who need additional English language teaching. 
IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES 
Good community relations in this country depend upon a clear structure of 
immigration controls which are fair, understandable and properly enforced. We 
are determined to maintain our present system of immigration controls unless we 
have evidence that other arrangements would be equally satisfactory and 
cost-effective. 
But an increasing number of would-be immigrants from Eastern Europe and other 
parts of the world seek to abuse our openness to genuine refugees. The number of 
people seeking refugee status has risen from 5,000 a year to 45,000 over the 
past four years. 
We will continue to honour our commitment to the 1951 UN Convention, and give 
refuge to those who reach our shores with a well-founded fear of persecution. 
  In the new Parliament we must therefore reintroduce the Asylum Bill, opposed 
  by Labour and the Liberal Democrats, to create a faster and more effective 
  system of determining who are genuine political refugees, and who are not. 
  We will provide a fair and expeditious system for examining claims for refugee 
  status. This will include a workable appeal system for applicants under which 
  those with manifestly unfounded claims will be returned quickly to their own 
  country or to the country they came from. 
  Finger-printing will be introduced for asylum applicants, to prevent multiple 
  applications and fraudulent benefit claims. 
THE DANGER OF DRUGS 
Illegal drug abuse poses a major threat to the fabric of our society. It can 
destroy the health and lives of young people in particular. We will tackle this 
problem with vigour. 
We have already taken action on a wide front: 
  we have set up co-ordinators in every local education authority to train 
  teachers about the harm drugs can do, and to bring the fight against drug 
  abuse into the classroom; 
  we have set up 16 local drug prevention teams in inner cities to tackle 
  particular problem areas; 
  we have created the National Drugs Intelligence Unit at New Scotland Yard; 
  we have taken the lead in Europe in pressing for the establishment of a 
  Europe-wide Drugs Unit, as a first step towards a creation of a 
  we have set up a network of 31 drug liaison officers, in 19 different 
  countries, tracking the international drugs traffickers who threaten Britain 
  with their trade. 
We now have the toughest sanctions in Western Europe against drug traffickers. 
A number of public services and voluntary bodies are engaged in fighting drug 
misuse at local level. Such efforts need co-ordination to ensure that local 
effort and dedication is directed to best effect. 
  We will not legalise any banned drugs. 
  We will bring forward proposals to ensure that the control of drug misuse is 
  co-ordinated effectively. 
  We intend to strengthen our confiscatory powers still further. And we will 
  ensure that our controls against drug-trafficking are not weakened by any 
  changes in Europe. 
  We will make it an offence to supply anabolic steroids to minors. 
THE THREAT OF TERRORISM 
Tragic and dangerous events remind us only too frequently of the need for the 
special measures provided by the Prevention of Terrorism Act. While Labour 
proposes to weaken or dismantle them, we know that for the safety of our 
citizens they must be continued, and the police effort against terrorism must be 
reinforced. 
We have set up in New Scotland Yard arrangements to co-ordinate the activities 
of all our police forces in the fight against terrorism. 
  We will provide the necessary measures and resources to combat terrorism, 
  whether it comes from the IRA or other evil groups who seek to undermine our 
  democracy. 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERS
Conservatives believe we have responsibility one for another. We will continue 
to care for those in need and work to establish a society that is generous, as 
well as prosperous. Our health, care and social security systems are fundamental 
to government responsibilities; and we believe strongly in fostering voluntary 
services too. 
THE NHS - PRESENT AND FUTURE 
The Conservative Party is totally committed to the National Health Service. The 
Government has set out in the Patient's Charter the principles on which the NHS 
is based. The most fundamental of these is that need, and not ability to pay, is 
and will remain the basis on which care is offered to all by the NHS. Since 
1979, there have been great improvements in the health of the nation. 
  Life expectancy has increased by two years. 
  Deaths amongst babies and very young children have gone down by 40 per cent. 
  hospitals are treating well over a million more people a year as in-patients. 
  hospitals are treating over two million more people a year as out-patients. 
  kidney transplants have more than doubled. 
  hip replacements have increased by over 50 per cent. 
  coronary artery by-passes have nearly tripled. 
Since 1979 the Government has vastly increased the resources available to the 
NHS. 
  We have increased overall funding for the NHS by 55 per cent after allowing 
  for inflation. The cash increases in each of the three years up to 1992-93 
  have been the biggest ever. 
  The number of doctors and dentists has been increased by 17,000, and the real 
  resources committed to GP services have doubled since 1979. 
  The number of nurses and midwives has gone up by 69,000. 
  We have established the independent Pay Review Body which nurses had sought 
  for so long, and increased their pay by 43 per cent. It is hard now to 
  remember that Labour actually cut nurses' pay. 
  We have restored the hospital building programme so savagely cut by Labour at 
  the end of their last term of office. 
But the Conservative Government has not simply spent more money on the NHS. 
  We have reformed the organisation of the NHS to encourage those working in the 
  service to respond to what patients want and need, and to get the most out of 
  the increased money which the taxpayer provides. 
At local level, health authorities now have the task of buying health care with 
their local share of the National Health budget. Hospitals can now be run by 
their own local team of doctors, nurses and managers. By April there will be 156 
NHS Trusts whose local boards will have extra freedoms to develop local NHS 
services. Another 156 hospitals have applied to become trusts from April 1993. 
We have acted to reduce the long hours worked by junior doctors in hospitals. 
For the first time limits are being set on the number of hours which may be 
worked continuously. 
Good nursing is the essential complement to good medicine. We have introduced 
Project 2000 - a new approach to the professional training of nurses. 
The GP has a crucial role to play in the development of health services. Under 
the Government's fund- holding initiative, doctors have control over their own 
spending on behalf of patients for the first time. Over 3,000 GPs will be 
fundholders by April, caring for 14 per cent of NHS patients. A further 2,500 
are preparing to become fundholders in April 1993. As a result, new services are 
being offered at local surgeries and health centres. Many general practitioners 
have said that they would like to become involved in fund-holding. We have 
already extended the scope of the fund-holding scheme to allow general 
practitioners to provide services such as community nursing. 
  We will, year by year, increase the level of real resources committed to the 
  NHS. Savings made through greater efficiency will be ploughed back into the 
  Service. 
  We will develop a comprehensive research and development strategy for the NHS. 

  We will continue to develop the NHS Trust movement which places responsibility 
  for managing hospitals and other services with local teams who are closest to 
  patients. 
  We will continue to encourage the involvement of doctors and other medical 
  staff in the management of services. 
  We will introduce powers for nurses to prescribe where appropriate. 
  We will complete the implementation of Project 2000 training for nurses. 
  We will set goals for the employment of women in professional and managerial 
  posts in the NHS. 
  We will ensure that, following maternity leave or a career break, all women 
  working in the NHS, including those returning to nursing on a part-time or 
  job-sharing basis, are able to return to work of a similar status or level to 
  that which they left. 
  We will ensure that the benefits of fund- holding arrangements are available 
  to any GP who wishes to apply, and we will be ready to extend the scope of the 
  scheme further as it develops. 
THE PATIENT'S CHARTER 
No one questions the dedication of those who work in the NHS But before the 
Government's reforms, the system did not always allow that dedication to produce 
the service which people should be able to expect. 
The Patient's Charter sets out clearly what is now expected from the NHS. We 
have already pledged that in future no one will wait more than two years for 
treatment on the NHS. In many parts of the country for most treatments, the 
waiting time is much shorter than this; and we will seek further progress in 
reducing waiting times. 
  Binding guarantees will be set locally for in-patient waiting times, starting 
  with the operations where waiting causes most distress. To ensure that 
  progress on waiting times continues, we intend that from 31 March 1993, no one 
  should have to wait more than 18 months for a hip or knee replacement, or a 
  cataract operation. We are sure that, as now, many hospitals will be able to 
  do better than this. 
  We will move to a system under which a named nurse or midwife will be 
  responsible for your care while you are in hospital. 
  We will set specific targets for out patient waiting times. 
  We will make it easier for patients to find out what services are available 
  from the NHS via a new national NHS information service. 
  We will ensure that comparative information about the health standards 
  achieved by health authorities is available to the public. 
  Simple systems will be set up to allow complaints to be registered and 
  responses given if things go wrong. 
STRATEGY FOR HEALTH 
This Government has embarked on the first ever strategy for health. Good health 
requires more than good NHS care when people are sick. A variety of factors - 
including preventive medicine, diet, exercise, sensible drinking and not smoking 
- can contribute substantially to improving health across the whole population. 
  We will set health objectives to be achieved by the end of the century, 
  including reductions in illness and death from heart disease and cancers. 
  We will add new health objectives as the strategy develops. 
CARE SERVICES 
Care services for children, the elderly and the handicapped are provided by 
local government, health authorities, the private sector and voluntary groups, 
not directly by central government. But government is indirectly involved as the 
provider of taxpayers money and through its duty to set standards for publicly 
and privately provided care. 
As the number of elderly people in the population grows, there will be more 
frail and vulnerable citizens who need support. Many of them will want to be 
cared for at home. Others will need residential or nursing home care. It is 
vital that people should have choice in the type of care available. In all cases 
people must be able to rely on the quality of care. As we move towards 
implementation of 'Caring for People' in April 1993: 
  We will take steps to ensure that individuals who need residential or nursing 
  care continue to have a choice of homes, including independent homes. Money 
  transferred from the Social Security budget to local social services 
  departments will be used for this purpose. 
  We will ensure that all local authorities publish information about the social 
  services that are available, including information on standards and complaints 
  procedures. 
  We will provide choice in domiciliary and day care. 
  We will provide further funding for voluntary organisations to play their 
  vital part in the development of community care services. 
  We will support the organisations which help those who care for friends and 
  relatives at home. 
CHILDREN 
This Government introduced the Children Act, a landmark in legislation to 
protect children. The Act requires childcare facilities to be registered to 
ensure that standards are maintained throughout the country 
We believe that the diversity of childcare provision in the UK is one of its 
strengths. It offers parents real choice. Over 90 per cent of 3-4 year-olds are 
engaged in some form of group activity We shall continue to encourage the 
development of childcare arrangements in the voluntary and independent sectors. 
  Each local authority will be asked to produce a Local Childcare Plan setting 
  out the provision available in their area. 
  We will ensure that the standards implemented through the Children Act are 
  applied sensibly, and do not discourage private or voluntary arrangements 
  which are often best suited to the needs of children and parents. 
  We will carry forward a family support initiative, encouraging the voluntary 
  sector to work in partnership with families and local authorities. 
SOCIAL SECURITY 
Our aim is to improve further and modernise Britain's social security system. We 
are providing more support than ever before £14 for every £10 spent in 1979, 
after allowing for inflation. More importantly, this extra help is more clearly 
focused on those groups with the greatest needs - less well-off pensioners, 
disabled people and low income families. 
We have also sought to provide those on social security with better incentives 
to earn, and gain independence. All too often the old system created barriers to 
work and penalised the thrifty. 
The benefit structure is now more flexible and easier to understand. The new 
Benefits Agency is simplifying forms and widening choice in methods of payment. 
We will complete the massive investment in new technology - Europe's biggest 
computerisation project - that has made it possible to raise the quality of 
service to the public. And we will extend 'Helplines' and other means of 
assistance with individual difficulties. 
  We will continue to simplify social security forms wherever possible. 
  We will set up a new Family Credit telephone advice service to support working 
  families. 
  We will establish a new agency to carry out all social security war pensions 
  work with the aim of providing a better, more efficient service to war 
  pensioners and war widows. 
SECURITY IN RETIREMENT 
Britain's pensioners recognise the security that Conservative government brings 
- low inflation, savings that grow, firmness in the face of crime, public 
services that put the customer first. Those who have dedicated their lives to 
the service of the community deserve that stability 
We will continue to give the fight against inflation our first priority The 
basic state retirement pension will remain the foundation for retirement. We 
will continue to protect its value against price rises, as we have for the last 
13 years. 
We also recognise that some pensioners, who have no savings or pensions from 
their jobs, need extra help. So we will increase the additional support, already 
up by over £300 million a year since 1989, available to less well-off 
pensioners. 
The number of those over pensionable age will be far higher in the next century 
than it is today If we do not make provision now; the burden we will place on 
our children will be too great. That is why we must encourage people to build up 
savings, investments, and occupational and personal pensions. 
But Labour policy is hostile to such personal effort; Labour wants pensioners to 
depend on the State. Failure to control inflation meant that pensioners' incomes 
from savings were cut under the last Labour Government. 
About eight in ten pensioners have some sort of second income to top up their 
state pension. By abolishing the hated earnings rule we have enabled pensioners 
to keep their retirement pension, even if they take a job in retirement. And we 
have increased the level of savings that is disregarded in working out 
entitlement to benefits for pensioners. Personal pensions have brought real 
choice into retirement provision. Over 4½ million people have set up their own 
pensions since 1988. We want to see both occupational and personal provision 
expand much further in the course of the 1990s. (See 'Opportunity for all - A 
share in the future' for our proposals on occupational pensions.) 
  As evidence of our continuing commitment to poorer pensioners, we have 
  announced in the Budget an increase of £2 a week for single people, £3 a week 
  for couples, in income support for pensioners. Combined with the increases 
  this April, this measure will provide less well-off pensioners with between 
  £5.73 and £10.70 a week extra. 
  We will continue to pay, from April 1993, a rebate at the level recommended by 
  the Government Actuary for all those who contract out of the State Earnings. 
  Related Pension Scheme. 
  We will legislate to provide a new 1 per cent incentive for holders of 
  personal pensions aged 30 and over from April 1993, when the existing 
  incentive ends. 
  We will consider proposals for a new system of rebates to come into effect 
  from April 1996 with the aim of ensuring that personal pensions remain 
  attractive across the age range. 
  We are firmly committed to equal treatment for men and women in pensions. 
  Following assessment of the responses to our discussion paper, we will bring 
  forward legislation to achieve this. 
SUPPORTING FAMILIES 
Our reforms have cut away the barriers that meant many breadwinners lost money 
if they went to work. Family Credit has transformed the prospects of 350,000 
low-income families. As a result of improvements since 1988, we have made 
available an extra £600 million a year in real terms to low- income families 
with children. 
But we also recognise that all families face extra costs in bringing up 
children. So we have raised Child Benefit. For a two-child family the increases 
we are making will, by April 1992, have raised the total value of Child Benefit 
by almost £3 in a single year, to £17.45 a week. 
Our new Child Support Agency will make sure that absent parents make a proper 
contribution - and that far more lone parents and their children get the 
maintenance that is theirs by right. And benefit changes make it easier for more 
families - including single parents - to combine work and family 
responsibilities. 
  Child Benefit will remain the cornerstone of our policy for all families with 
  children. Its value will increase each year in line with prices. 
  Child Benefit will continue to be paid to all families, normally to the 
  mother, and in respect of all children. 
HELP FOR DISABLED PEOPLE 
Under the Conservatives, more disabled people than ever before are getting the 
help they need and deserve. Since 1979, the number receiving Attendance 
Allowance has more than trebled; the number receiving Mobility Allowance has 
risen six fold; the number receiving Invalid Care Allowance has risen 25-fold. 
Today we spend some £12,000 million a year on benefits for long-term sick and 
disabled people. Even after allowing for inflation, that is 2½ times as much as 
Labour spent in the 1970s. 
  Disability Living Allowance will bring together the existing Attendance and 
  Mobility Allowance, providing new help to many disabled people who at present 
  get no such help. Disability Working Allowance will make it easier for 
  disabled people to take up a job. 
  We are introducing new disability benefits which will, in the next Parliament, 
  bring extra help to at least 300,000 people. By 1993-94 these and other 
  improvements will mean that we will be directing an extra £300 million a year 
  to long-term sick and disabled people. 
  The Independent Living Fund has proved a great success in giving severely 
  disabled people an opportunity to live in the community. We are committed to 
  maintaining a fluid which supports the most severely disabled people. 
THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR 
Charities and voluntary groups play a vital role in our national life. Britain 
is rich in its citizens' willingness to give time, effort and money to helping 
others. We have a great tradition of voluntary work at home and overseas. There 
are now about 350,000 voluntary groups in Britain - and personal donations to 
charities now amount to some £5,000 million a year. 
We have done much to boost charitable giving. 
  Under the Payroll Giving Scheme, employees can now contribute up to £50 a 
  month tax-free. 
  Gifts and bequests have been exempted from Inheritance Tax. 
  The Gift Aid scheme allows charities to claim tax relief on one-off gifts of 
  more than £400 - a change just announced in the Budget. 
  The maximum limit on single charitable gifts qualifying for Income and 
  Corporation Tax relief has been abolished. 
The new Charities legislation will ensure that charities are better managed and 
properly regulated. We believe this will enhance public confidence in charities 
and further boost charitable giving. 
The Government gives some £2,500 million a year to support the activities of the 
voluntary sector (including housing associations). Industry has been generous 
with its sponsorship and with technical support. But money is not the only 
contribution that government and business can make. Businesses have become much 
more practically involved in work in the community And government could do more 
to encourage new forms of volunteering, to encourage the most effective use of 
the money it gives, and to bring together voluntary effort at the local and 
national level. 
  We will continue to support the work of the voluntary sector and promote 
  volunteering. 
  We will work with voluntary agencies to develop, over the life of the next 
  Parliament, a national bank of information on opportunities for volunteering. 
  We will encourage efforts to improve the co-ordination and promote the growth 
  of local volunteer support, building on the success of Neighbourhood Watch to 
  develop a network of voluntary help in local communities. 
ANIMAL WELFARE 
We are leading the European Community in our achievements in improving animal 
welfare. We have also taken action at home and abroad to improve conservation, 
and will continue to do so. 
English Nature, which advises the Government on wildlife issues, has embarked on 
an ambitious programme to restore endangered species. The Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981 provides special protection for 304 species of birds and 
animals, as well as protecting our heritage of wild plants. 
We are firmly opposed to international trade in rare and protected species such 
as rhinoceroses, cheetahs, leopards, and bears. We have pushed successfully for 
an EC ban on large-scale drift nets that threatened dolphins, and we support the 
UN resolution calling for a moratorium on their use. We support the extension of 
the moratorium on commercial whaling and have co-sponsored resolutions against 
'scientific' hunting of whales. We have successfully pressed for an EC ban on 
the importation of baby seal products and of furs from those countries which 
permit leghold traps. 
We have set up the Farm Animal Welfare Council and have brought in welfare codes 
covering livestock on farms and in transit. We are establishing an ethical 
committee to look at the effects of advanced techniques in animal breeding. We 
have banned the use of veal crates, and taken action to ensure humane slaughter. 
We insisted that we should retain our power to stop the export of live horses. 
At Maastricht we secured a landmark in animal welfare: our partners' agreement 
to a declaration that the welfare of animals should be taken into account in the 
framing of EC legislation. 
We now have the toughest set of controls on animal experimentation in Europe, 
and the number of animals used in experiments has fallen steadily We have 
supported stronger laws to protect badgers and stop cruel tethering, and have 
increased the penalties for organising animal fights and for cruelty. 
  We will introduce a Wildlife Enhancement Scheme and expand the Species 
  Recovery Scheme, both to be run by English Nature. 
  We have tightened controls on the import of wild birds and will press the EC 
  to do the same. 
  We oppose resumption of the trade in ivory or elephant products, and will 
  provide additional support for elephant conservation projects in Africa. 
  We will urge our EC partners to bring animal welfare standards up to UK 
  levels, for example by banning veal crates and stalls and tethers for pigs. We 
  will press them to put into practice the principles of the Maastricht 
  declaration. 
  We will use our EC Presidency to toughen up EC regulations and improve EC 
  compliance with rules governing animal experiments. 
  We will press for higher EC standards for the keeping of battery hens and for 
  the care of animals in transit. 
  We will not accept any weakening of our rabies prevention safeguards. 
A BRIGHTER BRITAIN
Making Britain a brighter and better place in which to live requires a high 
quality physical environment - including housing, transport and reinvigorated 
urban areas. The Conservative commitment is both to the re-creation of our civic 
pride and also to the preservation and integrity of our rural heritage, founded 
on the core industry of agriculture. Our aim is to enhance the quality of life 
for the British people. 
HOME OWNERSHIP 
The opportunity to own a home and pass it on is one of the most important rights 
an individual has in a free society Conservatives have extended that right. It 
lies at the heart of our philosophy We want to see wealth and security being 
passed down from generation to generation. Some 4 million more householders own 
their own homes compared with 1979. The number of former council tenants who 
have bought their homes has risen to 1.4 million. 
We now need to make it easier for those council tenants living in high-cost 
areas or on low incomes to move gradually into home ownership, without taking on 
too heavy a financial burden at any one time. This will bring the benefits of 
home ownership within the reach of more people and introduce more diversity in 
local authority estates. We also want to help more leaseholders to own and 
control the management of their property. 
But we recognise that not everyone can, or will want to, buy his or her home. So 
we are determined to encourage a strong private rented sector while continuing 
to safeguard the rights of existing regulated tenants. Bringing empty private 
sector dwellings back into use will extend choice, make it easier for people to 
move jobs, and help tackle homelessness. 
  We will maintain mortgage tax relief. 
  We will continue 'Right to Buy' discounts, and ensure that local authorities 
  respond reasonably and rapidly to applications. 
  We will introduce a new nation-wide 'Rents to Mortgages' scheme, enabling 
  council tenants to take a part-share in their home, gradually stepping up to 
  full ownership. 
  We will put more of the Housing Corporation's £2,000 million budget into 
  Do-It-Yourself shared ownership. This will enable first time buyers to choose 
  a home and buy a share of it - usually 50 per cent - with a housing 
  association paying rent on the rest until they wish to increase their stake in 
  the property. 
  We will introduce 'Commonhold' legislation, giving residential leaseholders 
  living in blocks of flats the right to acquire the freehold of their block at 
  the market rate. Leaseholders of higher rated houses will also be given the 
  right to buy the freehold of their property. Leaseholders who live in a block 
  which does not qualify will have a new right to buy an extended lease. 
  We will introduce statutory time limits for answers by local authorities to 
  standard inquiries by house-buyers, and explore the idea of a new computerised 
  Property Data Bank bringing together information held by the Land Registry and 
  other public bodies. 
  We will extend nation-wide the scheme we have piloted to increase private 
  renting, whereby housing associations manage properties, building trust 
  between tenant and private sector landlord. 
  As soon as possible in the new Parliament, we will introduce a flew 'Rent a 
  Room' scheme wider which home-owners will be able to let rooms to lodgers 
  without haying to pay tax on the rent they receive. 
MEETING HOUSING NEED 
We are also committed to securing a better deal for council tenants and 
increasing the supply of affordable housing for those in housing need. We will 
introduce more choice, improve management of estates and create new rights as 
part of the Tenant's Charter. Our aim will be to give tenants a choice of 
landlord wherever possible, and make management of both council and housing 
association stock more responsive to the needs of tenants. 
We will improve the way in which council housing is managed by bringing in new 
private sector providers operating on contract to the local authority We will 
introduce more competition and choice, thereby improving services to the tenant 
and increasing accountability. And we intend to give council tenants new 
opportunities themselves to improve the flat or house in which they live. 
We have already begun a process of Large-Scale Voluntary Transfer which allows 
local authority tenants to opt to transfer to a housing association. We wish to 
see this result in diversity, not local monopoly, and will therefore act to 
limit the size of blocks that can be transferred. 
Nearly all new social housing is now being built by housing associations. Over 
the next three years, we are committed to spend nearly £6,000 million through 
the Housing Corporation to provide 153,000 homes. 
We will do more to bring into use properties owned by central and local 
government which are standing empty for no good reason. This will enable us to 
house more people on the waiting list and, in some cases, to provide more 
opportunities for homesteading. 
Through Estate Action and Housing Action Trusts we have invested £1,000 million 
in recent years in a concentrated attack on the country's worst housing estates. 
Some 360,000 dwellings have been improved as a result. As part of those 
programmes, on which we are committed to spend a further £1,400 million over the 
next three years, we are demolishing or redesigning tower blocks and deck access 
estates, rebuilding on a more human scale. Wherever we can, whenever tenants 
want it, and where resources allow; we will pull down the eyesores which have 
blotted our cityscapes and too often provided breeding grounds for crime and 
delinquency. 
The Government is spending about £100 million tackling the problem of rough 
sleeping in our cities. As a result we have seen a sharp fall in the numbers who 
sleep rough on our streets. Working closely with the voluntary sector we will 
continue to provide help for those sleeping rough, particularly in the capital. 
  We will revolutionise the management of council houses and flats. Compulsory 
  competitive tendering will oblige local authorities to bring in managers who 
  demonstrate their ability to deliver the best services to tenants. 
  We will continue our programme of Large Scale Voluntary Transfer of council 
  properties to housing associations. But in order to bring management closer to 
  tenants, we intend to reduce the limit on the number of properties transferred 
  in a single batch. 
  We will give tenants a new Right to Improve, so they can receive compensation 
  for certain home improvements which they undertake. And we will improve the 
  existing Right to Repair. We will continue our Estate Action and Housing 
  Action Trust programmes which concentrate resources on the worst council 
  estates. 
  We will enable tenants to apply for Housing Action Trusts to take over and 
  improve the worst estates. 
  We will work with the Housing Corporation to establish a new Ombudsman for 
  housing association tenants. We will also encourage the Corporation to extend 
  opportunities for tenant involvement in the management of housing association 
  properties. 
  We will set up a Task Force - headed by an independent chairman - to help 
  bring empty government residential properties back into use. These will either 
  be sold or let on short term leases to those in housing need. 
  As part of Estate Action we will introduce a new pilot scheme to promote 
  homesteading. Local authorities will be encouraged to offer those in housing 
  need the opportunity to restore and improve council properties. In exchange, 
  homesteaders will pay a lower rent or be able to buy at a reduced price. 
TRANSPORT 
Under the Conservatives, transport in Britain is being transformed. More 
competition on the roads and in the air has led to better services and more 
choice. Our successful policies of deregulation and privatisation have gone hand 
in hand with a sustained and growing programme of investment. Over 1,000 miles 
of new trunk roads and motorway have been built, more than 100 bypasses 
constructed, and some 750 miles of railway electrified. Airlines now operate 50 
per cent more flights. More people travel further and more easily than ever 
before. 
Over the next three years we are committed to the biggest investment in 
Britain's transport infrastructure in our history 
We will also seek further opportunities for the private sector to contribute, as 
it has for example with the Channel Tunnel, the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge at 
Dartford, the second Severn Bridge and the Birmingham Northern Ring Road. We 
intend the proposed new rail link from the Channel Tunnel to King's Cross to be 
taken forward by the private sector. 
THE RAILWAYS 
We believe that the railways can play a bigger part in responding to Britain's 
growing transport needs, and are investing accordingly Next year alone, British 
Rail's external finance will top £2,000 million. The new Passenger's Charter 
will help to raise the quality of service. For the first time ever performance 
targets will be set, widely published and rigorously monitored; fare levels will 
reflect the standards set; and discounts will be paid to regular travellers 
where performance targets are not met. 
We believe that the best way to produce profound and lasting improvements on the 
railways is to end BR's state monopoly We want to restore the pride and local 
commitment that died with nationalisation. We want to give the private sector 
the opportunity to operate existing rail services and introduce new ones, for 
both passengers and freight. 
A significant number of companies have already said that they want to introduce 
new railway services as soon as the monopoly is ended. We will give them that 
chance. 
Our plans for the railways are designed to bring better services for all 
passengers as rapidly as possible. We believe that franchising provides the best 
way of achieving that. Long term, as performance improves and services become 
more commercially attractive as a result of bringing in private sector 
disciplines, it will make sense to consider whether some services can be sold 
outright. 
In the next Parliament: 
  By franchising, we will give the private sector the fullest opportunity to 
  operate existing passenger railway services. 
  Required standards of punctuality, reliability and quality of service will be 
  specified by franchises; subsidy will continue to be provided where necessary; 
  arrangements to sustain the current national network of services will be 
  maintained; and through-ticketing will be required. 
  A new Rail Regulator - who will ensure that all companies have fair access to 
  the track - will award the franchises and make sure that the franchisees 
  honour the terms of the contract. 
  BR's accounting systems and internal structures will be reorganised. One part 
  of BR will continue to be responsible for all track and infrastructure. The 
  operating side of BR will continue to provide passenger services until they 
  are franchised out to the private sector. 
  The franchise areas will be decided only after technical discussions with BR. 
  But our aim will be to franchise out services in such a way as to reflect 
  regional and local identity and make operating sense. We want to recover a 
  sense of pride in our railways and to recapture the spirit of the old regional 
  companies. 
  We will sell BR's freight operations outright. We will also sell its parcels 
  business. 
  We will be prepared to sell stations - which we want to be centres of activity 
  - either to franchisees or independent companies. 
  The Railway Inspectorate will be given full powers to ensure the highest 
  standards of safety. 
ROADS 
Nine out of every ten journeys, whether passenger or freight, are made by road. 
We must therefore continue to provide an efficient road network. In the years 
ahead we will concentrate particularly on the bypass programme. 
As part of the Citizen's Charter, we will bring forward reforms which will 
enable the private sector to start filling the gaps in the motorway service area 
network and to introduce more variety Rather than large, intrusive stations at 
long intervals we should see smaller, more frequent service areas providing a 
much wider range of facilities. 
We will investigate ways of speeding up, within the Department of Transport, the 
procedures for building new roads. We will continue our campaign to keep 'coning 
off' on motorways to a minimum by extending lane rental schemes, under which 
contractors who fall behind schedule incur financial penalties. Next year 
two-thirds of all motorway maintenance work will be carried out in this way. 
Britain has the best road safety record in the European Community In spite of 
the vastly increased volume of traffic, fewer people are now killed on our roads 
than at any time since 1948. Our aim is to improve on that record still further. 

In spite of the benefits they bring, cars carry an environmental cost. In 
Britain catalytic converters will be compulsory on all new cars from the end of 
1992. This will eliminate virtually all harmful exhaust gases, except for the 
emission of CO2. The only certain way of cutting CO2 emissions is to encourage 
fuel efficiency. Action is needed at international level and we will play our 
full part. 
Buses have an increasingly important part to play The deregulation of 
long-distance coach services has led to a major expansion in reliable and cheap 
services. Bus deregulation outside London has increased mileage by 16 per cent. 
We now propose to take deregulation and privatisation further. 
We will improve road transport by: 
  Investing £6,300 million in our trunk road and motorway network over the next 
  three years, concentrating particularly on bypasses. Some 40 new ones will be 
  opened by 1993 on trunk roads alone. 
  Increasing penalties for those convicted of drink driving. 
  Installing cameras at dangerous road junctions to film those who drive through 
  red traffic lights. 
  Encouraging local councils, assisted by a special budget we have set aside, to 
  introduce pedestrian priority areas and cycle lanes. 
  Privatising the remaining 39 local authority bus companies. 
  Deregulating buses in London and privatising the London Buses subsidiaries. A 
  new London Bus Executive will be responsible for bus- stops, stands and 
  stations and for contracting out socially necessary services. The 
  concessionary fares scheme in London will continue. 
  Changing the system under which motorway service areas are provided. 
  Encouraging action internationally, and within our own motor industry, to 
  promote more fuel-efficient vehicles. 
AVIATION AND SHIPPING 
More competition in aviation means more choice, better services and lower fares. 
That is why we have been pressing within the EC for full liberalisation of 
services. We also want to see more transatlantic flights, particularly to 
regional airports. People in the regions should not have to travel to London in 
order to fly to the United States. Direct flights would boost local economies 
and apply downward pressure on fares. The key regional airports are still in 
local authority ownership. They should be well placed to benefit from an 
increase in the number of direct point-to-point flights. But if they are really 
to grow and prosper, they need access to private capital, freed from the 
constraints of public ownership. 
Air safety cannot be compromised. Over the next five years the Civil Aviation 
Authority will. invest £750 million in modernising its systems. 
More can be done to cut some of the regulatory burdens our shipping industry 
faces. We will ensure that the recommendations of the Government Industry Joint 
Working Party are put into effect as rapidly as possible. 
  We will further liberalise transatlantic air services and encourage more 
  international flights to and from regional airports. 
  We will encourage local authorities to sell their airports. 
  We will reduce airport congestion by increasing the capacity of our air 
  traffic control 
  We will continue to campaign within the EC for further liberalisation, 
  particularly of cabotage, so that there are more commercial opportunities for 
  British companies. 
LONDON'S TRANSPORT 
A major programme of renewal and modernisation is transforming public transport 
in London - including the biggest expansion of London's rail network since the 
1930s. 
The £750 million upgrading of the Central Line is already under way, to be 
followed by a similar programme on the Northern Line; the Jubilee Line extension 
and Crossrail will follow. 
London Underground is planning to invest £3,500 million over the next three 
years. It has introduced an ambitious Company Plan which will lead to better 
service, cleaner trains and more staff at stations and on platforms. Their new 
Charter will be published shortly 
Responsibility for the Docklands Light Railway has been transferred to the 
London Docklands Development Corporation. As its performance continues to 
improve, we expect to see growing private sector interest in purchasing it 
outright. 
  We will seek to privatise the Docklands Light Railway during the lifetime of 
  the next Parliament. 
  The new Jubilee Line is being extended to Docklands and South East London and 
  will be followed by the East-West Crossrail, linking Paddington to Liverpool 
  Street. The Docklands Light Railway is being extended at an eventual cost of 
  £800 million. 
  London Underground's Charter will set out tougher new standards and what it 
  will do to compensate passengers should it fail to meet those standards. 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
Local councillors - some 25,000 men and women throughout Britain - are 
responsible for some of our most important public services. Since 1979 we have 
sought to create an accountable local government system capable of delivering 
high quality local services at a price that local people are prepared to pay. 
Conservatives councils in shires, districts and cities have been at the 
forefront of these reforms. In a responsive and efficient manner, they have 
demonstrated how to deliver good services at an affordable price. 
Over the past 13 years, we have: 
  held down unjustified rises in the cost of local government; 
  abolished the power of local councils to shift the burden of taxation on to 
  local business, for the first time limiting the overall rise in business rates 
  to no more than the rate of inflation; 
  abolished an expensive and bureaucratic layer of government in London and 
  other big cities; 
  developed the local authority role from direct provider to effective enabler, 
  encouraging many tenants to buy their own homes, allowing schools the freedom 
  to manage their own affairs and improving the quality of local services by 
  allowing private business to compete for contracts. 
Labour threaten all these reforms. They would 'uncap' local spending, leading to 
higher local and national taxes. They would 'uncap' business rates, threatening 
a return to the 1980s when the English rate poundage rose 37 per cent more than 
inflation. They would abolish the requirement on local authorities to seek value 
for money through competitive tendering. They would remove the freedom of local 
communities to preserve their grammar schools. They would introduce a new; 
expensive layer of government bureaucracy at regional level. They would return 
local government finance to the bad old days of domestic rates, with 
unrestrained power for local councils to charge householders as much as they 
like. And they would abolish the Audit Commission, which not only maintains the 
probity of local government accounting, but also pioneered the drive for better 
quality of service and value for money in local government. 
We now propose further reforms in the structure, finance and accountability of 
local government. In the meantime, we have transferred a further share of the 
burden of financing local services to central government. Today, local community 
chargepayers bear only a small proportion of the cost of local councils. 
  We will set up a commission to examine, area by area, the appropriate local 
  government arrangements in England. Local communities will be fully consulted 
  and their loyalties and interests will be central to the commission s task in 
  deciding whether in any area a single tier of local government could provide 
  better accountability and greater efficiency. 
  We are looking at ways in which the internal management of local authorities 
  might become more effective. 
  We are applying the principles of the Citizen's Charter to local government, 
  requiring the publication of more information which will enable local people 
  to judge the efficiency of their councils in providing services. 
  We will continue to 'cap' local spending where necessary. 
  As we announced in the Budget, no one's Uniform Business Rate will go up this 
  year by more than the rate of inflation 4.1 per cent. And we have speeded up 
  the benefits of revaluation for those businesses who gain from it. 
  In future years, we will maintain our pledge to prevent UBR poundage rising by 
  more than inflation. 
  We will replace the Community Charge with a new Council Tax in April 1993. The 
  Council Tax will be simple and straightforward to administer. It will be fair 
  and will rightly reflect both the value of the property and the number of 
  adults who live in it. 
  Single householders, who suffered under the rates, will receive a 25 per cent 
  discount. By grouping properties into a limited number of bands, the Council 
  Tax also avoids the punitive bills which would be imposed by an unfettered 
  rating system of the kind proposed by Labour. Students and people on low 
  incomes will not have to pay. 
CITIES 
We take pride in our cities. Right across Britain they have been given a new 
lease of life. From London to Glasgow; from Cardiff to Newcastle, historic 
buildings have been restored and areas which had been run down have been 
transformed. The £4,000 million Action for Cities programme underlines the 
Conservative commitment to our inner cities and the people who live there. It 
highlights our determination to spread opportunity as widely as possible. We 
want all our people to share in growing prosperity and to have a stake in the 
country's future. Much has been achieved in recent years. The Urban Development 
Corporations and the wide range of central government grants have helped to 
regenerate many of our inner city areas. But more remains to be done. 
The best way to restore the spirit of enterprise which first made our cities 
great is for local people, the private sector, the voluntary sector and local 
and central government, to work together in partnership. That is the principle 
which lies behind City Challenge. Its new approach of competitive bidding has 
already galvanized towns and cities into bringing forward imaginative proposals 
for regeneration. It has improved co-ordination, secured better value for money 
and encouraged programmes which tackle problems on a number of fronts. 
  We will continue to extend City Challenge and allocate a greater proportion of 
  resources by competitive bidding. 
  We will support Urban Development Corporations in their critical task of urban 
  regeneration. 
  We will bring together resources targeted inner city programmes into a single 
  budget. This will mean that funding will go where it is most needed locally 
  rather than according to a set of priorities determined in Whitehall. 
  We will strengthen the machinery for co ordination in the regions. New, 
  integrated regional offices of the appropriate Whitehall departments will be 
  established so that business and local government will have only one port of 
  call. 
  We will establish a new Urban Regeneration Agency to pull together our efforts 
  to clear up and develop derelict land, helping to bring it back into 
  commercial use and provide new opportunities for local people. 
Working in the urban areas, the URA will administer much of the Urban programme 
of the Department of the Environment. It will have a dual function. First, 
outside the existing UDC areas, it will reclaim derelict land, assembling 
suitable sites for redevelopment using vesting or compulsory purchase powers 
where necessary Second, it will itself be able to develop land in partnership 
with the private sector. This represents a major step forward in unlocking the 
commercial potential of our inner cities and of breathing new life into areas 
which may have been derelict for many years. 
But our focus is not just on physical regeneration. We want to see more 
opportunities for training, more encouragement to enterprise, better education 
and more measures to tackle drugs and crime. 
Encouraging enterprise, improving the environment and providing new 
opportunities for the unemployed are central to our inner city policies. 
Remotivating individuals and providing the right conditions for business are the 
only ways to make lasting change. 
  We will offer the Loan Guarantee Scheme for small firms on more generous terms 
  in inner city areas. The scheme will be extended from Task Force areas to 
  include successful City Challenge bidders. 
  We will make more people eligible for our successful Job Interview Guarantee 
  Scheme, which links unemployed people with local lobs. 
  We will carry out pilot projects for the 'foyer' concept, whereby young people 
  are given a place in a hostel if in exchange they give a commitment to train 
  and look for work. 
  We will pilot a number of 'back to work' bonus schemes in inner city areas for 
  the long-term unemployed. 
  We will extend customised training under the Job Link programme to include 
  City Challenge areas. 
  We will make inner city Task Force and City Challenge areas eligible for 
  regional innovation grants. 
We are also determined to raise standards in our inner city schools, to crack 
down on truancy, and to help prepare young people for the world of work. 
The City Technology Colleges show what can be done. They are overwhelmingly 
popular with parents and pupils and are doing much to raise standards for 
children of all abilities in the inner cities. 
Under the Citizen's Charter, we shall soon be able to identify much more 
precisely than ever before those schools which are delivering unacceptably low 
standards. So will parents. We will publish test results, exam results and 
truancy rates and ensure that there is regular independent inspection. This will 
enable us to put the spotlight on those inner city LEAs and schools which are 
failing their pupils. 
  We will continue to seek opportunities to open new CTCs in deprived inner city 
  areas. 
  We will ensure that more schools, especially in the inner cities, have the 
  opportunity to develop their technological expertise. 
Tackling crime and the fear of crime forms a vital part of the strategy to make 
our inner cities better places to live and work. The Safer Cities initiative, 
launched in 1988, has successfully brought together local groups and agencies to 
tackle crime in some of our worst affected urban areas. Twenty schemes are 
already in operation. 
  We will double the number of Safer Cities Schemes to cover 40 urban areas. 
LONDON 
London is a magnet to visitors and business from across the world. Since 1979 we 
have invested heavily to secure that status. Billions of pounds have gone into 
improving air, rail and underground links. We will continue that programme of 
modernisation. We are determined to sustain into the next century London's 
special position as one of the world's leading capital cities. We reject 
Labour's plan to recreate a bureaucratic and wasteful GLC. Instead, as part of 
our Millennium programme, we will launch a London 2000 initiative. The Secretary 
of State for the Environment will convene a new private sector forum to promote 
London internationally as a business, tourist and cultural centre. The Secretary 
of State will also chair a new Cabinet sub-committee to bring together Ministers 
from all key departments and co-ordinate policy for the further improvement of 
London. A single Minister will be given responsibility for co-ordinating 
London's transport services. London's place as a world centre for financial and 
insurance services is pre-eminent; we intend to keep it that way And we will 
support the vigorous cultural life of the capital, which has seen new galleries, 
theatres and museums opening over the last decade. 
  We will launch a London 2000 initiative. 
  We will convene a new private sector forum to promote London's position 
  internationally. 
  We will establish a new Cabinet sub committee to co-ordinate policy on London. 

  We will give a single Transport Minister responsibility for services in 
  London. He will chair a new Transport Working Group which will bring together 
  public transport operators from both public and private sectors - to discuss 
  transport issues in London. 
THE COUNTRYSIDE 
We have always cared for the countryside. We support its major industries and 
way of life, while recognising the place it holds in the hearts of those who 
live in towns. 
We want to protect our most beautiful landscapes, conserve the abundance and 
variety of our wildlife and habitats, promote access and public enjoyment of the 
countryside, and encourage public participation in caring for the countryside. 
But the countryside is more than just a pretty picture. It is a place where 
people live and work, as they have done in the past and will do in the future. 
In providing our public services, we will continue to recognise the particular 
needs of people who live in the countryside. 
  We will continue to promote a diverse rural economy, balancing the need for 
  jobs, housing and services in rural areas with protection of the rural 
  environment. 
AGRICULTURE 
Centuries of farming have shaped our countryside. Now farming is at a 
crossroads, both here and in the rest of the European Community World-wide 
pressure to reduce protectionist measures, and the need to contain the cost of 
the Common Agricultural Policy, mean that farmers will face reduced support and 
increased competition. 
We believe that farming in the UK can meet these challenges. But many farmers 
will need help to adapt to the new conditions, and we will continue to provide 
assistance. 
It will become increasingly important for farmers to obtain a greater proportion 
of their income from the market. We will encourage farmers, retailers and 
manufacturers to work together to increase our share of the European food 
market. 
We are committed to reducing the burden of regulation on business in general, 
and farming in particular. We will not accept UK farmers being put at a 
disadvantage by EC laws being applied differently in other countries. 
Responsible farmers have always combined efficient farming with care for the 
countryside. We will continue to encourage this approach through schemes to 
protect landscape and habitats of special importance. We will also maintain 
direct support for farming in the Less Favoured Areas in ways which encourage 
good environmental practice 
  We will seek a reform of the CAP which brings agriculture closer to the 
  market; reduces the costs to taxpayers and consumers; is implemented at a pace 
  which the industry can bear; affects all Community farmers equitably, 
  regardless of size or location; and recognises the importance of environmental 
  protection. 
  We will build on the producer marketing initiatives which we have already 
  launched, including the Group Marketing Grant. 
  We will assist the Milk Marketing Board's move to a new structure which will 
  be better able to protect the interests of producers and consumers in the 
  Single Market. 
  We will publish target response times for grant and licence applications made 
  to the Ministry of Agriculture. 
  We will take forward proposals for radical liberalisation of the agricultural 
  tenancy laws in order to make more land available for rent, especially for new 
  entrants. 
  We will enforce effective pollution control regulations while helping farmers 
  to meet the high standards required. 
  We will press for an agreement in the EC's Agricultural Council which will 
  allow us to provide financial encouragement for organic agriculture. 
FORESTRY 
Forestry is a traditional rural industry, which also affects the landscape, and 
gives pleasure to millions of people. The needs of a successful industry, 
landscape conservation, and public access must all be accommodated; and we will 
reorganise the Forestry Commission to reflect these objectives more effectively. 

  We will plant a new national forest in the Midlands and community forests 
  elsewhere. 
  We will review the effectiveness of the current incentives for forestry 
  investment. 
  We will produce guidance on the preparation of local Indicative Forestry 
  Strategies designed to encourage new woodlands, while steering planting away 
  from sensitive areas. 
FISHING 
Fishing is a vital industry in many parts of our islands. Many fishermen have 
done well in recent years but they now face great pressure on the fish stocks. 
This means that fishing quotas are likely to fall in coming years in order to 
preserve the long-term future of the fisheries. We will continue to work for the 
profitable and sustainable future of our fishing fleet. 
  We are determined to see that the renegotiation of the Common Fisheries Policy 
  protects the interests of UK fishermen and retains our share of the 
  Community's fishing opportunities. 
  We will introduce a balanced package of measures, including decommissioning 
  and controls on fishing activity, to conserve fish and safeguard the future of 
  the industry. 
RURAL JOBS AND SERVICES 
Changes in agriculture and other traditional industries will affect employment 
opportunities in the countryside. We will continue to target help through the 
Rural Development Commission, and ask the RDC to review the Rural Development 
Areas to ensure that its efforts are targeted on the areas of most need. We are 
committed to developing tourism in ways which provide all-year-round jobs and 
bring benefit to less well-known parts of our countryside, without damaging the 
environment. We have recently published new planning policy guidance which makes 
it clear how the countryside can benefit from new businesses and jobs, if the 
location and design of development are handled with sensitivity 
In local government, many of our shire counties and districts have led the way 
in raising the quality of public service. Local post offices, local transport 
and local schools all have an important role to play in sustaining rural life. 
  We will consult on our recently published draft planning policy guidance 
  designed to provide a clear framework for decisions on developments to aid 
  tourism. 
  We will widen the availability of the Rural Development Commission's 
  successful Redundant Buildings Grant Scheme, and strengthen other RDC 
  programmes. 
  We will maintain our special programmes to promote affordable homes in rural 
  areas. 
  We are fully committed to maintaining a national network of post offices. 
  We will continue to assist local authorities who want to subsidise rural 
  transport. 
  We will enable village schools that wish to apply for Grant-Maintained status 
  to do so in small groups, thus enabling them to share management tasks while 
  still enjoying the benefits of independence. 
  The expansion of GP fund-holding will bring particular benefits to rural areas 
  because of the convenience of different services - such as physiotherapy and 
  consultant appointments - being offered in the GP's surgery. 
CARING FOR THE COUNTRYSIDE 
Some of our finest landscapes are designated as National Parks. All National 
Park authorities will become independent Boards, which will make it easier for 
them to carry out their tasks effectively The New Forest will be given a 
statutory status which will give it as great a level of protection as any 
National Park. 
Last summer the Government launched an experiment in Countryside Stewardship'. 
This aims to conserve, enhance and re-create fine landscapes so that they may be 
enjoyed and appreciated by the public. The response from farmers, landowners and 
environmental bodies has been very positive. We therefore propose to expand the 
scheme and to introduce a new scheme to preserve hedgerows - a much valued 
feature of the English landscape, and a haven for wildlife. 
The Government endorsed and supported the Countryside Commission's target 
designed to bring 120,000 miles of rights of way into good order by the end of 
the century. 
At parish level, individuals can work together either to safeguard the character 
of their local village, or to improve its appearance. Local action can also 
preserve local wildlife and habitats. Under the Rural Environmental Action 
Scheme, grants of up to £2,000 per project will be available to support local 
environmental action. 
The Government is keen to promote the fullest possible use of inland waterways 
for leisure, recreation and amenity, in the regeneration of inner cities and for 
freight transport where appropriate. But we recognise that the various uses of 
canals and rivers must be properly managed to protect the character and 
environment of the waterways. 
  We will expand the Countryside Stewardship Scheme to cover the conservation of 
  historic landscapes, meadows, pasture and hedgerows. Public access to 
  qualifying schemes will be encouraged. 
  We will introduce a Hedgerow Incentive Scheme to help preserve hedgerows of 
  particular historic, landscape or wildlife importance. 
  We will contribute to the Countryside Commission's new Parish Path Partnership 
  designed to stimulate local maintenance and improvement schemes. 
  We will continue to support the development and redevelopment of our canals, 
  as well as enhancing the environmental standards of our waterways. 
THE ENVIRONMENT 
The Conservative Party's commitment to the environment is beyond doubt. Other 
parties promise the earth. We have taken action - both nationally and 
internationally - to preserve it. 
Environmental protection can impose financial costs on producers, consumers and 
taxpayers, so we must make sure the threat of damage is a real one. But we also 
accept the precautionary principle - the need to act, where there is significant 
risk of damage, before the scientific evidence is conclusive. And we recognise 
that higher environmental standards can offer new opportunities for business. 
We published the first comprehensive White Paper on the Environment in 1990. It 
covered everything from the stratosphere to the street corner. We will continue 
to publish annual progress reports. 
This Conservative Government has taken a lead in working to protect the ozone 
layer. We will strive to accelerate the eradication of ozone depleting 
substances. 
One of the most important issues facing all countries is the threat of global 
warming. Effective action to combat global warming must be international action. 
Again we have taken a lead. The Prime Minister was the first world leader to 
announce his intention to attend the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro this June. 
We have said that we will consider stabilising our CO2 emissions earlier than 
our existing conditional target of 2005. We have promised to provide new and 
additional resources to help the developing countries to tackle their 
environmental problems. 
Within Britain, and ahead of other European countries, we have introduced the 
concept of integrated pollution control. 
We have set up, for the first time, powerful co-ordinating machinery within 
Whitehall to ensure that environmental considerations are given due weight in 
all decision-making. 
We are committed to openness on environmental matters. We support the 
establishment of a European Environment Agency to provide a Europe-wide 
environmental database. We believe that the public should have access to 
information held by the pollution control authorities. Public registers are now 
provided by bodies such as the National Rivers Authority and Her Majesty's 
Inspectorate of Pollution. 
  We will establish a new Environment Agency which will bring together the 
  functions of the National Rivers Authority, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of 
  Pollution and the waste regulation functions of local authorities. 
  The new EA will have a statutory duty to publish an annual State of the 
  Environment report. 
  Within the European Community we will press for the introduction of integrated 
  pollution control on the UK model. 
TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM
A more prosperous Britain can afford to be ambitious. We can aspire to 
excellence in the arts, broadcasting and sport. We can use our increased leisure 
time, energy and money, to improve life for ourselves and our families. The 
National Lottery we propose to introduce can be used to restore our heritage and 
promote projects which will become a source of national pride. 
National Lotteries have been found useful at several times in our history. The 
British Museum was founded out of the proceeds of such a lottery. Fourteen years 
ago, a Royal Commission recommended the creation of a National Lottery in 
Britain to provide extra money for deserving causes. The case has become even 
stronger as British people gain more opportunities to participate in foreign 
lotteries - thus increasing the risk that funds which we could put to good use 
in Britain will be diverted abroad. 
We believe a well-run, carefully controlled form of national lottery would be 
popular, while raising money for many good causes. 
We will canvass views on how such a lottery should be run and controlled, and 
how it would fit within the pattern of charitable fund-raising in Britain. 
We believe that the funds generated by a National Lottery should be used to 
enhance the life of our nation. People who enjoy the arts, sport, Britain's 
heritage and fine countryside could all benefit from the proceeds from a 
National Lottery. Charities, right across the country and covering such areas as 
medical research, will also be potential beneficiaries. 
THE MILLENNIUM FUND 
We will be consulting widely on the best way to distribute the proceeds of a 
lottery. But we have decided that part of the proceeds should be put aside, year 
by year, into a Millennium Fund specifically dedicated to projects which will 
commemorate the start of the twenty-first century and will be enjoyed by future 
generations. 
  We therefore propose to introduce a National Lottery from 1994, which would 
  help provide funds for a number of good causes in the artistic, sporting, 
  heritage and charitable fields - and from which some funds would be put aside 
  for a Millennium Fund. 
The Millennium Fund could be used, for example: 
  To restore the fabric of our nation: our great inheritance of buildings which 
  symbolise and enrich our national life. 
  To help endow our cities and regions with facilities to enhance the 
  celebration of United Kingdom 2000, such as the sporting facilities Manchester 
  would need to host the 2000 Olympics. 
  To help another major city - chosen by competition - to hold an international 
  trade fair designed to be a showcase of British innovation for the 
  twenty-first century. 
  To enable voluntary groups and local communities to bid for funding for their 
  own Millennium projects for local restoration schemes, or for improving the 
  amenities of canals and rivers, as a source of enjoyment for local people and 
  a habitat for wildlife. 
  To provide Millennium bursaries for young people (and newly retired people) 
  offering their time, energy and commitment to schemes designed to change the 
  face of the United Kingdom by the year 2000. 
THE ARTS 
Britain has a great artistic heritage and a lively contemporary arts scene. The 
arts have flourished in recent years, with growing attendance at theatre, opera, 
dance and arts festivals. 
We have supported this by increasing the public funding of the arts, by 60 per 
cent in real terms since 1979, and introducing new incentives to personal 
giving. The arts have also forged new partnerships with local authorities, 
businesses and private patrons. Business sponsorship in particular has expanded 
hugely. 
We have set up new Regional Arts Boards and supported the Scottish and Welsh 
Arts Councils in order to diversify and enrich cultural life throughout the 
country. 
We have financed the European Arts Festival to be held throughout Britain during 
our Presidency of the Community in the second half of this year, as well as the 
first National Music Day in June. 
In this year's Budget, we announced further tax relief on film-making in this 
country. Our aim is to make the performing arts, museums and our heritage 
accessible to all. We will encourage the young to become involved and will 
facilitate access for the disabled. 
  The National Lottery will provide a new source of finance for the arts. 
  We will maintain support for the arts and continue to develop schemes for 
  greater sponsorship in co-operation with business and private individuals. 
  We will re-examine the role of the Arts Council, as many of its functions are 
  now carried out regionally. 
  We will continue our support of libraries as educational, cultural and 
  community centres, and urge local authorities to keep up standards. We will 
  complete the new British Library building for which we have provided £450 
  million. 
SPORT 
Success in sport is a source of national pride. Enjoyment of sport can enrich 
every life. We have given strong support to the Sports Council and its efforts 
to raise participation in sport. We actively support Manchester's bid to bring 
the Olympic Games to Britain. 
We want to restore the good image of football. Tough action has cut down 
football hooliganism. We have helped to establish the Football Trust, which now 
devotes £20 million a year to improving the safety of grounds. 
Under the National Curriculum all primary and secondary age pupils will follow a 
course of PE. All pupils will be taught to swim by the age of 11. 
We will continue to encourage private sector sponsorship of sport. We will 
encourage more effective use of local sport and leisure facilities through 
compulsory competitive tendering. We want to see more dual use of school playing 
fields and halls and will give schools more freedom in their management. 
We are asking Local Education Authorities not to make sales of school playing 
fields in future unless there is no evidence of long-term need. 
  Sport, too, will benefit from the resources generated by the National Lottery 
  We will actively support Britain's bid to host the 2000 Olympic Games in 
  Manchester. We will provide £55 million towards the preparation of the site 
  and key facilities in the first stage of the bid, and we will ensure that the 
  project, whether successful or not, contributes to the effective regeneration 
  of East Manchester. 
  We will set up a new Business Sponsorship for Sport scheme. This is expected 
  to raise £6 million in its first year to support local and youth sport. 
OUR HERITAGE 
Public interest and involvement in Britain's heritage has never been greater. We 
have created in the past decade English Heritage and the National Heritage 
Memorial Fund to give greater focus and drive to the Government's policies. The 
National Trust and private owners take a leading part in preserving our almost 
unrivalled heritage. Government will work in partnership to secure our heritage 
for the benefit of future generations. 
Our cathedrals are among our national glories. We therefore launched the 
Cathedral Repair Grant Scheme in April 1991, providing £11.5 million over three 
years. 
We have increased, to £12 million, the grant to the NHMF for the purchase of 
historic properties, objects and collections. The Government also provides help 
to private owners through English Heritage repair grants, and tax relief in 
return for commitments on upkeep and public access. 
We want to preserve the special character of our old town and city centres. We 
will encourage councils to ensure that new developments are in character with 
the past; to maintain buildings of importance to the character of towns and 
cities; to limit unnecessary street furniture and signs; and to plant trees and 
preserve historic patterns and open spaces. 
  The National Lottery will also provide funds for the preservation of our 
  heritage. 
  We will continue to provide substantial financial assistance for the 
  protection and preservation of the heritage. 
  Together with the heritage agencies, we will work to make heritage sites 
  accessible to the public. 
BROADCASTING 
We are proud of our record of extending choice, encouraging new producers and 
maintaining high standards in broadcasting. We opened the way to the setting-up 
of Channel 4, independent radio, satellite television and multi-channel cable TV 
networks. The 1990 Broadcasting Act means that three new independent radio 
services and a fifth television channel will be set up during the next 
Parliament. 
Over two million homes already receive satellite TV We have now licensed well 
over a hundred cable TV networks and this new industry expects to invest £3,000 
million over the next five years. In coming years, British viewers will have an 
increasing choice of channels and programmes. The new and sophisticated cable 
networks will open the way not only to new telecommunication services, but also 
to the spread of emerging technologies such as high definition television. 
We attach great importance to the work of the Broadcasting Standards Council, 
which we set up under the 1990 Act. All television and radio companies accept 
the need to maintain standards of taste and decency in their treatment of sex 
and violence and their use of bad language. 
The European Community regulates standards in satellite broadcasts originating 
from each Member State. We were one of the first countries to ratify a new 
Council of Europe convention applying similar rules to all its Member States. We 
also, in the Broadcasting Act, brought in sanctions against the transmission of 
offensive satellite broadcasts from abroad, and made it an offence for 
advertisers and equipment suppliers to support such programmes. 
Independent television producers are benefiting from the requirement put on the 
BBC and ITV to commission a quarter of all their programmes, excluding the news, 
from outsiders. There are now great opportunities for independent producers to 
sell their programmes to new television channels and international markets, and 
there is much greater choice for viewers as a result. 
In 1996, the BBC's Charter comes up for renewal. This will be considered against 
the background of the much more varied and competitive broadcasting environment 
which our policies have created. It is important that there should be a wide 
public debate about the future direction the BBC should take. 
  We will back the work of the Broadcasting Standards Council and remain 
  vigilant about ensuring high standards in satellite broadcasts from abroad. 
  We will publish a discussion paper on the future of the BBC recognising its 
  special responsibilities for providing public service broadcasting. 
A UNITED KINGDOM
The United Kingdom is far greater than the sum of its parts. Over many centuries 
its nations have worked, and frequently fought, side by side. Together, we have 
made a unique mark on history Together, we hold a special place in international 
affairs. To break up the Union now would diminish our influence for good in the 
world, just at the time when it is most needed. 
Nationalist plans for independence are a recipe for weakness and isolation. 
Higher taxes and political uncertainty would deter investment and destroy jobs. 
The costly Labour and Liberal devolution proposals for Scotland and Wales have 
the same drawbacks. They do not intend to bring about separation, but run that 
risk. They could feed, but not resolve, grievances that arise in different parts 
of Britain. They would deprive Scotland and Wales of their rightful seats in the 
United Kingdom Cabinet, seats the Conservatives are determined to preserve. We 
believe strongly that we should go on working together in full partnership in a 
Union that has served every part of the United Kingdom well. 
The plans for devolution put forward by the other parties would have a grave 
impact not just on Scotland and Wales, but also on England. They propose new and 
costly regional assemblies in England, for which there is no demand. We will 
oppose all such unnecessary layers of government. 
The Union has brought us strength both economically and politically Yet it has 
preserved the historic and cultural diversity of our islands. Our constitution 
is flexible, fair and tolerant. It has made this country one of the best places 
in which to live, work and bring up our children. These benefits cannot be 
tossed away lightly We will fight to preserve the Union, a promise which only 
the Conservatives can give at this election. 
SCOTLAND 
Scotland has achieved an economic and cultural regeneration over the past 13 
years. The Scottish economy has responded vigorously to the policies we have 
introduced to liberate enterprise, and many more people are now saving, 
investing and owning their homes. The public services are better funded and more 
efficient. There has been a flowering of Scottish culture. 
Scotland enjoys a rich and distinct tradition and her own institutions, which we 
have preserved and strengthened. Scotland has its own framework for the 
encouragement of enterprise, investment and training; its own education system 
which continues to excel, with more pupils leaving school better qualified and 
more going on to further and higher education; its own health budgets which 
deliver high standards of care; and its own glorious inheritance of buildings 
and countryside. 
A separate Manifesto for Scotland sets out our record in detail and our 
proposals for building on these achievements. In this document, therefore, we 
list only a selection. 
  Business in Scotland has received a boost from our creation of Scottish 
  Enterprise and the Local Enterprise Companies. We have formed Scottish Trade 
  International to help our exporters, as Locate in Scotland does for inward 
  investors. To assist business further, we will complete the harmonisation of 
  business rates in Scotland with those in the rest of the country. 
  The massive bureaucracies and layers of local government have few supporters 
  in Scotland. We will continue to press local authorities to provide the value 
  for money and the quality of services that people expect. We will press ahead 
  with the reform of the current burdensome system of local government by 
  introducing single tier councils throughout Scotland. 
  We will continue to strengthen Scotland's education system for the benefit of 
  parents, pupils and teachers. We will respond to the proposals of the Howie 
  Committee to ensure that upper secondary education matches the best in Europe. 
  We will continue to increase the number of places in higher and further 
  education and will complete our reforms of the system. 
  We will extend our reforms to improve NHS patient care in Scotland. Scotland 
  has led the way in setting limits to waiting-times for operations and will now 
  be reducing these further. 
  We are creating a new body, Scottish Natural Heritage, with overall 
  responsibility for conserving the natural environment. We will go further, and 
  will create a Scottish Environmental Protection Agency to bring together 
  powers to ensure the quality of our air, rivers and bathing waters. 
WALES 
Since 1979, the economy of Wales has changed spectacularly With only 5 per cent 
of the United Kingdom's population, Wales has consistently enjoyed 20 per cent 
of its inward investment. New industries have sprung up. Self-employment has 
risen by two-thirds. Welsh manufacturing now has the highest productivity of any 
part in the United Kingdom. 
Land made derelict by old industries has been reclaimed on a massive scale. The 
Cardiff Bay development and the Ebbw Vale Garden Festival are outstanding 
examples, together with the Programme for the Valleys. 
Since 1979, we have spent more than £3,000 million on roads in Wales. Spending 
on health has increased by 60 per cent in real terms since 1979. We have spent 
more than £5 million on our radical Waiting Times Initiative, leading to the 
treatment of 35,000 extra patients. In school we are spending nearly half as 
much again, in real terms per pupil, as in 1979. And there has been an enormous 
expansion in the training budget. 
More Welsh homes - 72 per cent - are owned by those who live in them than in the 
United Kingdom as a whole. Since the 'Right to Buy' was introduced in 1980, we 
have enabled almost 90,000 council and housing association tenants to buy their 
own homes. 
A separate Manifesto, in both English and Welsh, sets out our full programme for 
building on these achievements for Wales. 
  We will set up a Welsh Economic Council to bring together the various bodies 
  with interests in inward investment, tourism and small business to advise the 
  Secretary of State. 
  We aim to remove all significant dereliction from Wales by the end of the new 
  Parliament. 
  We will promote the work of the Countryside Council for Wales, in order to 
  protect the countryside and those who earn their livelihood there. 
  We will give further resources to our Rural Initiative. And we will continue 
  to support hill farmers through the Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances. 
  We will continue to invest heavily in road improvements, including the second 
  Severn Bridge, completing the M4 in South Wales and the M5 in North Wales. 
  We will continue with our record hospital building programme. 
  We will continue to offer generous funding for Housing for Wales and 
  concentrate our efforts on the special needs of rural Wales. All major 
  publicly funded housing developments will make adequate provision for the less 
  well off. 
  We will introduce a new Welsh Language Act. 
  We will publish a White Paper on local government reform this autumn with a 
  view to establishing unitary authorities, based on the historic counties and 
  county boroughs. We will ensure a full role for Community Councils under these 
  arrangements. 
NORTHERN IRELAND 
We have upheld our pledge that Northern Ireland will remain an integral part of 
the United Kingdom in accordance with the democratically expressed wishes of the 
majority of the people who live there. It is a pledge that only the Conservative 
and Unionist Party can give. Conservative candidates are standing in our name 
and in that cause. 
Our overriding objective in Northern Ireland is to eliminate the evil of 
terrorism. This requires progress in four areas: security, economic, social and 
political. The security forces in Northern Ireland perform their duties with 
courage and professionalism. They are entitled to expect all the necessary 
encouragement, and legal and material support from the Government. Under the 
Conservatives, the strength of the RUC has been increased, while the Emergency 
Provisions Act 1991 contains new powers to combat terrorist funding. 
Northern Ireland is sharing in the economic transformation of the United Kingdom 
as a result of Conservative policies. Belfast is attracting significant new 
private investment. Harland and Wolff and Shorts have been successfully 
privatised. Major work is also under way to regenerate Londonderry and many of 
Ulster's smaller towns. We will continue to pursue policies to encourage 
enterprise and bring new jobs - by contrast with Labour, whose plan for a 
national minimum wage would hit the Province particularly hard. 
In the new Parliament we will continue to seek to re-establish stable 
institutions of Government in Northern Ireland, so that powers currently 
exercised by Ministers in the Northern Ireland Office can be returned to 
locally-elected politicians. 
  We will always give the security forces our full backing within the rule of 
  the law, and - against Labour opposition - ensure that they have the special 
  powers they need to protect the whole community from violence. 
  We will complete the privatisation of Northern Ireland Electricity, transfer 
  the water and sewage services to the private sector, and examine ways of 
  bringing private sector skills into the management of Northern Ireland 
  Railways. 
  We will continue to pursue policies designed to alleviate social needs, to 
  promote equity of treatment and to widen the sense of common purpose which is 
  growing in the Province. 
  We will build on the close security co operation that has been established 
  with the Republic of Ireland under the Anglo-Irish Agreement. 
  We will continue to work strenuously for a political agreement which is 
  acceptable to all the parties involved in the talks which the Secretary of 
  State has had during the past year with the main constitutional parties in 
  Northern Ireland and the Government of the Republic of Ireland. They have 
  provided a firm basis for political progress in Ulster, and for building new 
  relationships both between Northern Ireland and the Republic, and in these 
  islands as a whole. 
YOUR CHOICE AT THIS ELECTION
This Election is about the future. Your future. Britain's future. Our future 
role in the world. This is a time to go forward with conviction and confidence, 
not to go back to the failure and bitter controversies of the past. 
It is difficult to remember the Britain we were elected to transform in 1979. 
The country we did transform. 
It was a depressed and divided country, accustomed to failure and suspicious of 
change. 
During the succeeding Parliaments, we have curbed inflation, reformed trade 
union law; encouraged enterprise, cut taxes, modernised our education and 
training, improved the management of our health service, given more help to the 
needy, extended ownership, helped through our vigilance to end the Cold War, 
widened our influence in Europe, and earned the respect of the world. 
A decade of success ended with the problems of recession - a world recession. We 
know how tough it has been for many but we are poised to move forward again, 
lacking only the spark of confidence with which a Conservative victory would 
ignite recovery. 
THE CHALLENGE AHEAD 
The challenges of the 1990s demand a responsible and sure-footed government 
which understands the nature of the achievements of the 1980s and is ready to 
build successfully on them. A government committed to the principles of choice, 
ownership, responsibility and opportunity; committed to low inflation and low 
taxes; committed to better quality and value in our public services; committed 
to strong defences. Labour cannot provide that leadership. They lack experience, 
principle and vision. 
With Socialism everywhere in rout or retreat, it is unclear what the Labour 
Party stands for. For public consumption, Labour leaders purport to have 
jettisoned the principles of a life-time. But how much can they be trusted? How 
genuine is the conversion and what do they actually believe? 
It is clear only that Labour would threaten our achievements, undo our reforms 
and hamstring Britain. They would turn the clock back to policies that 
impoverished and divided our country. Socialism here and abroad is the regret of 
yesterday not the hope of tomorrow. 
ONLY THE BEST FOR BRITAIN 
We believe that only the best is good enough for Britain, and that the best will 
only be accomplished if we give the British people the freedom and the 
opportunity they need to succeed. 
We have a new leader, proven in office, and a new agenda - yet a tried set of 
principles. Those principles reflect our conviction that Britain has done best 
when the people of Britain have been given the personal incentive to succeed. 
National success has not been primarily the result of accidents of geography, 
landscape and natural resources. Nor has it been the result of government action 
and state control. Success has been won when we have given our people their 
head: when their natural skills, talents, energy; thrift and inventiveness have 
been released, not suppressed. That was true when this century began; it is 
still true as this century draws to its close. 
Britain should approach the Millennium with head and spirits high, with a strong 
economy, with a high standard of living, with generously endowed and well 
managed public services, and with secure defences. We want Britain to be an 
example to the world of how a free people can make the very best of their 
destiny. That prospect is within the grasp of us all. We must now make it 
happen. 
The prize is great, the hope invigorating, the dream attainable. We want, with 
you, to make the dream a reality. A Conservative Government will help you to 
achieve the very best. The very best future for Britain.

British Conservative Party: Manifesto for 1997 General ElectionYOU CAN ONLY BE 
SURE WITH THE CONSERVATIVES
The Conservative Manifesto 1997


Foreword 
The Conservative administrations elected since 1979 are among the most 
successful in British peacetime history. A country once the sick man of Europe 
has become its most successful economy. A country once brought to its knees by 
over-mighty trade unions now has industrial peace. Abroad, the cold war has been 
won; at home, the rule of law has been restored. The enterprising virtues of the 
British people have been liberated from the dead hand of the state. There can be 
no doubt that we have created a better Britain. 
Why, then, do we still need a Conservative Government? Because resting on what 
we have achieved is not enough. To stand still is to fall back. Our goal must be 
for Britain to be the best place in the world to live. 
We live in a tougher, more uncertain world. A fast-moving global free market is 
emerging. New economic powers are rising in the East. Family life and social 
attitudes are changing. Europe is adjusting to the end of communism. The 
European social model is failing. The nation state is under threat. We must 
respond to these challenges. 
We have turned around our economic fortunes. We have fewer people out of work 
and more in work than any other major European economy. British people now have 
the opportunity of a prosperous future. But that prosperity cannot be taken for 
granted. We have to compete to win. That means a constant fight to keep tight 
control over public spending and enable Britain to remain the lowest taxed major 
economy in Europe. It means a continuing fight to keep burdens off business, 
maintaining our opt-out of the European Social Chapter. If we relax for one 
moment, our hard won success will slip away again. 
We have strengthened choice and personal ownership for families, and rolled back 
the state from areas where it was interfering unnecessarily in our lives. But we 
now have the opportunity to achieve a massive expansion in wealth and ownership 
so that more families can enjoy the self-respect and independence that comes 
with being self-sufficient from the state. Our far-reaching proposals for 
personal pension funds are central to achieving this - so too are our plans to 
increase support for the family in our tax system. Our aim is to spread 
opportunity for all to succeed, whoever they are and wherever they come from, 
provided they are prepared to work hard. To turn the "have nots" into the 
"haves". To support the family in providing security and stability. 
We have modernised and reformed many of the areas where the state still has a 
vital role. But we now have to build on these reforms to deliver even better 
services. We must continue providing the resources to invest in our modernised 
health service. We can now provide parents with a hard-edged guarantee of 
standards in schools. We need also to widen choice in areas where state 
bureaucracy has constrained it. 
We have pioneered new ways of building partnerships that engage the private 
sector in areas previously dependent on the public purse. We now need to capture 
private sector investment on a massive scale to regenerate our cities, transform 
our crumbling local authority housing estates and modernise other public assets. 

The only way to secure this future of opportunity is to stick with the 
Conservative programme of continuing reform. Now would be the worst possible 
moment to abandon the pathway to prosperity on which we are set. We must keep up 
the momentum. 
At the same time we must maintain the security that a stable nation provides in 
an uncertain, fast-changing world. We must protect our constitution and unity as 
a nation from those who threaten it with unnecessary and dangerous change. And 
we must stand up for our interests in shaping a free-market Europe of sovereign 
nation states. 
There is, of course, an alternative on offer: to load costs on business while 
calling it "stakeholding"; to increase the role of the state, while calling it 
"the community"; to succumb to a centralised Europe while calling it "not being 
isolated"; to break up our country while calling it "devolution". 
To risk this alternative would be a disaster for our country. We have come a 
very long way. We must be sure that we do not throw away what we have gained, or 
lose the opportunities we have earned. 




      Our Vision for Britain
      The Enterprise Centre of Europe
        1. Doubling Living Standards
        2. Jobs and Business 
      Opportunity and Ownership for Individuals and Families
        3. Choice and Security for Families
        4. Education and Opportunity 
      World Class Health and Public Services
        5. Security in Health
        6. Better Public Services 
      A Safe and Civil Society
        7. Law, Order and Security 
      A Confident, United and Sovereign Nation
        8. The Best Place in the World to Live
        9. Europe and the World
        10. The Constitution 
      A Choice of Two Futures




The Enterprise Centre of Europe
Our Record
  The UK is on course to grow faster than both France and Germany for the sixth 
  successive year in 1998 - a post-war record. 
  Inflation has now been below 4% for well over 4 years, the longest period of 
  low inflation for almost half a century. 
  Mortgage rates are at their lowest levels for 30 years. 
  Unemployment has fallen to its lowest level for 6 years. We now have a lower 
  unemployment rate than any other major European economy. Youth unemployment in 
  Britain has fallen to less than 15% whereas by contrast, in France it has 
  risen to 27% and in Italy to 33%. 
  A higher proportion of our people are in work than in any other major European 
  economy - 68% against a Continental average of 57%. 
  The UK is the favourite location for inward investment into Europe, attracting 
  around one third of inward investment into the European Union. 
  We have the lowest tax burden of any major European economy, with the 
  government taking almost 8% less of national income than the European average. 

  Public borrowing has averaged 3.4% of GDP since 1919 compared with 6.8% (and a 
  peak of 9.5%) under the last Labour Government. Our level of public debt is 
  now one of the lowest in the European Union - whereas it was one of the 
  highest in 1979. 
  In 1994 the UK lost 300,000 working days through strikes, the lowest figure 
  ever recorded; in 1979 the figure was 29,500,000: nearly 100 times that 
  figure. 
  Britain ranks fifth in the world in international trade, and exports more per 
  head than America or Japan. Exports account for 28% of GDP as against 9% for 
  Japan, 11 % for USA and 24% for Germany and France. Britain's current account 
  is broadly in balance, reflecting our increased competitiveness and improved 
  trading. 



1. Doubling Living Standards 
The free market is winning the battle of ideas the world over. From Russia to 
Vietnam, from China to Romania, people are realising that the socialist model 
has failed. This is not just an economic triumph. It is a triumph for human 
freedom. Britain helped to secure it. We should take pride in it. 
The spread of the free market heralds a new age of global competition. That 
means new markets for British goods and services, but new competitors for 
British companies as well. 
If we try to protect ourselves from these challenges with more regulations, 
public subsidies and a cosy dependence on government then Britain will fail. But 
if we boldly embrace these new opportunities by pushing forward the economic 
revolution we began in 1979, then we will enter the next millennium with 
boundless prospects for growth and prosperity. 
That choice - between stagnation and dynamism - is the choice which faces 
Britain at this election. It is a stark choice between the British way - of 
trusting the people and unleashing enterprise - and the failing social model, 
practised on the continent, which the Labour Party wants to impose on us here 
under the guise of "stakeholding". 
Hard economic evidence shows how great is the divide between these two 
strategies. Britain is now in its fifth year of growing faster than France or 
Germany. Unemployment in Britain has fallen to less than two million, while it 
rises across Europe. Britain attracts nearly forty per cent of all the American 
and Japanese investment in Europe. Our aim now is to safeguard these 
achievements and build on them, so Britain becomes the unrivalled Enterprise 
Centre of Europe.
 
A Low Tax Economy 
For enterprise to flourish, the state must get out of the way of the wealth 
creators. We are the only party that can cut taxes because we are the only party 
which is serious about controlling public spending. The choice between the two 
economic philosophies is clean In the years before 1979, public spending in 
Britain kept pace with the average for Europe as a whole. Since then, it has 
continued rising on the continent, while we have restrained public spending 
here. Now, public spending takes about 40% of our national income as against an 
average of 50% on the continent. We have broken free from a trend in which the 
rest of Europe is still trapped. 
Conservative government will keep public spending under tight control and ensure 
that it grows by less than the economy as a whole over the economic cycle. At 
the same time we will continue to spend more on the services which matter most 
to people - hospitals, schools and the police. 
  Over the next parliament, we will achieve our goal for the government to spend 
  less than 40% of our national income
That means we can reduce the amount government borrows too, and meet our aim of 
moving towards a balanced budget in the medium term. Our plans show how we can 
virtually eliminate public borrowing by the year 2000. 
Thanks to our success in controlling public spending, Britain is now Europe's 
low tax economy. This is one of the reasons why we are becoming the Enterprise 
Centre of Europe. 
  Our aim is to ensure Britain keeps the lowest tax burden of any major European 
  economy.
In the election manifesto of 1992, we promised that "We will make further 
progress towards a basic income tax rate of 20p". Since then, we have cut the 
basic rate of income tax from 25p to 23p, and extended the 20p band so that over 
a quarter of all taxpayers now only pay income tax at the 20p rate. Achieving 
our public expenditure goals will mean we can sustain permanently low tax 
levels. 
  Over the next parliament, our aim will be to achieve our target of a 20p basic 
  rate of income tax, while maintaining a maximum tax rate of no more than 40p.
Stable Prices 
Inflation has to be kept firmly under control for an economy to thrive. Britain 
is now enjoying the longest period of stable prices for almost fifty years. We 
are on target to reach our goal of 2½% inflation this year. 
Low inflation has delivered lower interest rates whilst preserving the value of 
people's savings. Homeowners are now enjoying mortgage rates at the lowest 
levels for 30 years. 
It has taken tough decisions to break free from our reputation as a high 
inflation economy. No Conservative government will jeopardise this achievement. 
  During the next parliament, we will maintain an inflation target of 2½% or 
  less.
Rising Living Standards 
The only secure base for rising living standards is a strongly growing economy, 
low levels of public spending and taxation, and stable prices. That is exactly 
what Britain is achieving. People are reaping the rewards of their hard work as 
their take home pay increases. Between 1974 and 1979, the take home pay for a 
family on average earnings rose, in real terms, by just £1 a week in today's 
prices. Since 1979 it has increased by £100 a week; this year alone it will 
increase by £7 a week. 
  The goal which we set ourselves in 1995 is to double living standards over 25 
  years.
We are on course to achieve our goal. 
2. Jobs and Business 
Our priority is to create jobs. This is not just an economic priority, but also 
a social and moral one. Jobs and enterprise are the best ways of tackling 
poverty and deprivation. 
Britain is succeeding. 900,000 jobs have been created over the past 4 years. By 
contrast the European social model is stifling job creation on the continent by 
imposing regulations and burdens on business. In the United Kingdom unemployment 
is much lower than in the rest of Europe and falling whereas in Germany, France, 
and Italy it has risen to its highest level for a generation. This is no 
accident. It is because we have pursued very different policies from those on 
the Continent. 
Curbing the power of trade unions, opening up markets and cutting red tape, have 
given us a low strike, low cost economy: and as a result Britain is the number 
one location for foreign investment in Europe. 
Never have such policies been so important. For the first time this century we 
face a world full of capitalist competition. The only way Britain will be able 
to compete and win in world markets is by sticking to the Conservative policies 
that are delivering success. We can earn prosperity as one of the world's most 
successful global trading nations. We should not risk this progress by adopting 
the very policies that have made the continent uncompetitive and have increased 
unemployment in Europe by 4.5 million over the past 5 years.
 
Small Businesses - Britain's Risk-takers 
Governments do not create jobs. Businesses do. The source of tomorrow's jobs 
will be small businesses, the seedcorn of Britain's prosperity. Over the last 15 
years, small businesses have created over 2 million jobs. By the year 2000, over 
half the workforce should be working in companies which employ fewer than 50 
people. Back in 1979 only a third of the workforce did. 
Entrepreneurs often risk everything when they set up their own business. We have 
already helped them: raising the VAT threshold, cutting employer's national 
insurance contributions, simplifying audit requirements and much more besides. 
Now we intend to go further, tackling the remaining problems they face. 
High taxes and rates deter enterprise. Our low tax structure has been crucial to 
our industrial revival. We already have the lowest corporation tax of any major 
industrialised country. As we want small businesses to flourish, we will go even 
further. 
  We will cut the small companies rate of corporation tax in line with personal 
  taxation as we move towards a 20p basic rate
Investment and enterprise are deterred if the taxman takes too much of the 
capital that is built up by a successful business. Capital is ever more mobile, 
flying around the world to places where the tax on it is low: Britain must be 
one of those places. 
  We will continue to reduce the burden of capital gains tax and inheritance tax 
  as it is prudent to do so.
One of the heaviest burdens small businesses face is business rates. At the 
moment, this bears more heavily upon small businesses than large ones. 
  In the next parliament, we will reform business rates to reduce the cost that 
  falls upon small businesses.
No businessman has time to fill out reams of forms. We will continue to simplify 
the administration of NICs and PAYE for small firms, allowing them to 
concentrate on satisfying customers not bureaucrats. We are also tackling a 
problem that hits small businesses particularly hard - the late payment of 
bills. On top of our programme to ensure government departments and local 
authorities pay on time we have legislated to require companies to publish their 
payment policy and to report their record on how quickly they pay their bills to 
small businesses. 
We have already abolished over a thousand regulations. New regulations must only 
be introduced if it is clear that their benefits exceed their costs and they do 
not place an undue burden on a small firm. 
  We will introduce "sunset" requirements into new regulations whenever 
  appropriate so that they are automatically reviewed or dropped after a 
  specific period.
Many businessmen suffer regulatory burdens imposed by local government and 
quangos. 
  We will therefore insist that the whole of the public sector adopts the same 
  stringent rules that we require of central government in justifying the 
  benefits of new regulations against their costs.
Reducing the Burden on Companies 
Jobs depend on British firms winning orders: the difference between success or 
failure can be wafer-thin. Any extra burden on business will destroy jobs. 
Britain is enjoying more jobs and record investment, thanks to the competitive 
edge we have over other European countries. We are a low cost economy But that 
does not mean we are a low pay economy. Our competitive advantage comes from the 
lower costs facing our businesses. It can be measured by the social costs an 
employer has to pay on top of every £100 of wages: in Germany it is £31, in 
France £41, but in Britain, it is only £15. 
Many countries in Europe have tried to cocoon themselves from global competition 
behind layers of red tape and regulation - such as the Social Chapter and a 
national minimum wage. This provides a false sense of security, playing a cruel 
trick on working people. It also excludes the unemployed from work. As companies 
in the rest of Europe have grown more uncompetitive, employers have found it too 
expensive to employ new workers, investment has gone elsewhere, and the dole 
queues have lengthened. The European social model is not social and not a model 
for us to follow. But if Britain signed up to the Social Chapter it would be 
used to impose that model on us - destroying British jobs. 
  No Conservative government will sign up to the Social Chapter or introduce a 
  national minimum wage We will insist at the Intergovernmental Conference in 
  Amsterdam that our opt-out is honoured and that Britain is exempted from the 
  Working Time Directive: if old agreements are broken, we do not see how new 
  ones can be made
We will resist the imposition of other social burdens on the work place through 
a new European employment chapter. 
Welfare into Work 
Although governments cannot create jobs, they can help people train and find 
work. We now have in place a battery of schemes working with Training and 
Enterprise Councils to provide targeted help and training, including remedial 
education in literacy and numeracy. We are also developing new incentives, 
alongside Family Credit, to help people move off benefit into work. 
We will always help those in genuine need: in return, the unemployed have a 
responsibility to look for work and accept a reasonable offer That belief 
underpins our new Jobseeker's Allowance which ensures that no-one can refuse 
reasonable work opportunities and remain on benefit. 
 
As unemployment falls, we want to focus on those who have been unemployed for 
some time. At present, Project Work is helping 100,000 people who have been 
unemployed for more than 2 years in cities around Britain. They are first given 
help in finding a job - which includes giving employers incentives to take them 
on. Those who do not find jobs are then required to work for a specific period 
on a community project. This helps them regain work habits and ensures they are 
available for work. 
  As Project Work succeeds and demonstrates that its costs can be met by the 
  savings from getting people into work, we will extend the programme to cover 
  the long-term unemployed nationwide
  We will also develop an innovative "Britain Works" scheme which uses the 
  experience and ingenuity of private and voluntary sectors to get people off 
  welfare into work.
Britain has one of the most mobile economies in Europe. People move on, and up, 
into better paid jobs more easily than on the continent. 
The Information Society 
Britain is at the forefront of creating tomorrow's information society Already 
we have exposed domestic telecommunications to competition and stimulated 
investment in cable and satellite entertainment systems. And by opening up 
international telecommunications we will continue to encourage companies 
worldwide to base their global operations here. We will make sure that the 
digital revolution comes to Britain first. 
We are launching an ambitious programme with industry to spread "IT for All", 
giving every adult the opportunity to try out and learn about new IT services. 
We will work with industry to ensure that all schools are connected to the 
information superhighway. 
  We will use the Millennium Lottery Fund to transform the computer facilities 
  and information links available in schools, libraries, museums, voluntary 
  organisations and other public places after the turn of the century.
This will give the public much wider access to information services in the years 
ahead. We will also take advantage of information technology to transform the 
way government provides services to the public. 
We will keep Britain in the vanguard of new mobile service development - 
including mobile telephone and information services - by introducing a pricing 
system for the radio spectrum to achieve more efficient allocation of radio 
frequencies. 
We will maintain a strong, free and competitive broadcasting and press 
environment at both national and local level, while continuing to be vigilant in 
monitoring whether action is needed to curb breaches of standards, and prevent 
unacceptable press intrusion. 
Science 
British science enjoys a worldwide reputation for excellence and 
cost-effectiveness, which makes Britain an attractive base for many domestic and 
overseas companies. We will continue to invest in science and target funds at 
basic research, which would not otherwise be funded by industry. At the same 
time we will provide an enterprising environment which encourages firms to 
invest with confidence in applied science. 
2020 Vision 
There is no part of the globe which has not been reached by British enterprise 
and British culture. We have always looked out beyond these shores, beyond this 
continent. Our language, our heritage of international trading links, our 
foreign investments - second only to America's - are historic strengths which 
mean we are ideally placed to seize the opportunities of the global economy. 
Thanks to Conservative policies of liberalisation and privatisation we are 
strong in industries of the future such as telecommunications, financial 
services, and information technology. These are the industries that will benefit 
from opening up trade around the world. We will push for completion of the 
European Single Market and continue to pursue the objective of transatlantic 
free trade against the background of world trade liberalisation. 
  Our aim is nothing less than tariff free trade across the globe by the year 
  2020
Free competition is important for free markets. Companies should not make 
agreements that restrict competition and hence result in poor value for 
consumers. We have set out proposals to give companies greater protection 
against price fixing, dumping, and other restrictive practices by larger 
competitors. 
  We will introduce a Competition Bill to take forward these proposals in the 
  first session of the next parliament
We are committed to pushing forward our competitiveness agenda which is making 
Britain the Enterprise Centre of Europe. 



Opportunity and Ownership for Individuals and Families
Our Record - Opportunity 
  The right to buy has allowed 1.5 million council tenants to become homeowners. 
  There are over 4 million more homeowners today than in 1979. 
  The Government has spent £6 billion through housing associations to provide 
  homes for rent. Between 1992 and 1995 housing associations provided 178,000 
  new lettings - 25,000 more than promised in the 1992 Manifesto. 
  There are now around 10 million private shareholders, up from about 3 million 
  at the time of the last Labour government. 2.5 million people now have tax 
  free savings in PEP accounts, and 4.5 million in TESSAs. 
  Since 1979, the success of private pension provision has raised the average 
  income of pensioners by 60% more than inflation. Almost 90% of recently 
  retired pensioners now have incomes over and above state benefits. 
  Savings in private pension funds have increased to £650 billion -more than 4 
  times the level in 1979. Their value is greater than the pension funds in all 
  other EU countries added together. 
  Over the period 1979 to 1995, education spending per pupil rose from £515 to 
  £1,890 - an increase in real terms of 48%. Real spending on books and 
  equipment per pupil rose 56%. Teachers' real pay rose 57%: from £270 per week 
  in 1979 to £420 in 1995. 
  In 1979, 40% of three and four year olds attended nursery school; in 1995 the 
  figure was 59%. Our nursery vouchers now give this opportunity to every child. 

  The proportion of sixteen year olds staying on in full-time education rose 
  from 4 out of 10 in 1979 to 7 out of 10 in 1995. 
  Almost 1 in 3 young people now go on to university, compared with 1 in 8 in 
  1979. 
  The proportion of adults with no academic qualifications has halved since 1979 
  and the proportion of adults with a degree or equivalent has more than doubled 
  rising from 5% to 12%. 
3. Choice and Security for Families
The family is the most important institution in our lives. It offers security 
and stability in a fast-changing world. But the family is undermined if 
governments take decisions which families ought to take for themselves. 
Self-reliance underpins freedom and choice. 
Families are stronger if they have the money to look after themselves: that is 
why we are shifting power and wealth back to working families and away from the 
state. We have already achieved much - the average family's disposable income 
has gone up by 40% since 1979. But we want to go further. The next Conservative 
government intends to reform the tax system so that it gives substantially more 
help to families. 
We also want to encourage people to save so they have the security and 
self-respect that comes from being able to rely on their own resources rather 
than immediately turning to the state. We have already made much progress here 
too with widening ownership of homes, pensions, and the new PEPs and TESSAs. We 
now propose further radical measures for more saving for retirement. 
Families and Tax
We believe families should be left with as much of their own money as possible. 
They know better than politicians how to spend it. We have already cut the basic 
rate of income tax from 33p to 23p, and our aim is to get it down to 20p, 
benefitting 18 million taxpayers. We intend to do even more to help families in 
particular 
At the moment, if one spouse does not take paid work in order to look after 
children or dependent relatives, they not only give up earnings but may also be 
unable to benefit from their personal tax allowance. Yet this is the time at 
which their income is often most stretched. 
We believe our tax system should recognise and support the crucial role of 
families in their caring responsibilities. We will give them that support. 
  We will give priority to future reductions in personal taxation that help 
  families looking after dependent children or relatives by allowing one 
  partner's unused personal allowance to be transferred to a working spouse 
  where they have these responsibilities.
This will provide a targeted reduction in the tax bill to those families who 
need it most. Around 2 million one-taxpayer couples with dependent children, or 
looking after elderly relatives and others needing care, would gain up to £17.50 
a week - around £900 a year 
Family Savings
In the old days people just depended on the weekly pay packet or money from the 
state. But no job can be secure and the state cannot provide for every 
eventuality. It is ownership which brings true security and genuine independence 
from the state. That is why Conservatives have long dreamed of a property-owning 
democracy. Now we are delivering it in practice. Home ownership is up by 4.7 
million. 10 million people own a direct personal stake in our economy. 16 
million are gaining shares in their building societies thanks to our 
deregulation of them. We intend to carry forward our vision of a people's share. 
This is a significant increase in personal security. It is the Conservative 
vision of security through personal savings - not a socialist vision of security 
through the state. 
We want people to enjoy Britain's success - especially by owning shares in the 
companies for which they work. We have already introduced a number of schemes to 
encourage employee share ownership. To encourage a further expansion of worker 
shares, our new Share Match Scheme will allow employees to be rewarded with 
additional free shares if they acquire a stake in their company. 
  Our goal is that by 2000, more than half of the employees of Britain's larger 
  companies will own shares in those companies.
Four and a half million people now benefit from tax free TESSAs and 2.5 million 
from PEP schemes to encourage the accumulation of long term saving. We will 
continue to build on this success by exploring ways in which existing tax 
exemptions for savings can be developed - allowing individuals to secure their 
future and protect their families against unexpected contingencies. 
  We will continue to raise the threshold for inheritance tax as it is prudent 
  to do so.
People are not just saving for themselves but for their children and 
grand-children. These savings should not be penalised by the tax system. 
For many people their biggest asset is their pension. Thanks to the steps we 
have already taken to encourage occupational and personal pensions, we now have 
£650 billion invested in private pensions - more than the rest of the European 
Union put together We now plan to build further on this achievement. 
  We will make it easier for small employers to set up personal pension plans 
  for groups of employees.
  We will create more flexibility for people who save in personal pension plans 
  to continue investing in those schemes if they subsequently move to jobs with 
  company pension schemes.
  We will also create flexibility for employees with savings in Additional 
  Voluntary Contributions (AVC) schemes to take part of that pension earlier or 
  later than their main company pension.
But we believe the time has now come to plan for another important step in 
improving Britain's pension provision. Britain is already much better placed 
than many other countries to afford state pensions in the future, but we want 
even more people to be able to look forward to properly funded pension that 
grows with the economy and is free from dependence on taxes paid by future 
generations. We now propose a practical way of achieving a gradual 
transformation of the state pension scheme.

  At the start of the next parliament we will set out proposals to provide all 
  young people entering the workforce with a personal pension fund paid for 
  through a rebate on their national insurance contributions. At retirement they 
  would be entitled to the full pension earned by this accumulated investment. 
  This could give them a pension significantly higher than they would currently 
  receive from the state. But they will be guaranteed a pension at least equal 
  to the current bask state pension, increased in line with inflation.
This will be one of the most significant improvements in the state pension 
system since it was introduced. 
Older people currently in the workforce would be unaffected - they will continue 
to contribute as now and receive the normal state pension when they retire. 
This policy would come into effect early in the new millennium. Gradual phasing 
in of the new system over 40 years will make the impact on public finances 
affordable. Even at its peak, the net revenue forgone will be only a fraction of 
the savings from the recent Pensions Act. And eventually, the new policy will 
produce massive public expenditure savings. 
This far-sighted idea is in the best Conservative tradition. The growing wealth 
of the nation will provide for the next generation through private funding, 
underpinned by a state guarantee. British people will be able to look forward to 
retirement with even greater confidence. And our young people will have a 
pensions opportunity unrivalled in the world. 
Support for Families
Conservatives believe that a healthy society encourages people to accept 
responsibility for their own lives. A heavy-handed and intrusive state can do 
enormous damage. 
Some families need help to cope with their responsibilities. For them, Social 
Services play a vital role. They help with children where parental care has 
failed. They deliver an ever wider range of services to people with learning 
difficulties or who are mentally ill. Our community care reforms have given them 
a central role ensuring that elderly people get care of the highest quality: and 
in their own homes where possible. We need to ensure that role is properly 
fulfilled. 
Early in the next Parliament we will introduce a Social Services Reform Bill 
which will create a new statutory framework for social services. The Bill will 
provide for greater openness and accountability in social services. 
  We will provide new guidance to ensure social workers properly reflect the 
  values of the community - focusing their efforts on those families who most 
  need support, and minimising unnecessary interference. Social workers working 
  with children will receive special training to cope with the often 
  heart-rending cases they face.
  We will raise standards through a new regulatory framework which will apply 
  the same standards in both the public and private sector.
  We will also remove the power of local authorities to operate care homes where 
  this is in the best interests of the people for whom they are responsible.
We believe that families who use social services should be able to exercise 
choice wherever practicable. We have given cash payments to disabled people to 
purchase the services they need directly. 
We also want new ways of reinforcing individual choice where possible. We will 
therefore ensure no barriers stand in the way of local authorities wanting to 
issue their users with vouchers to buy certain services. 
  We will review the direct payment scheme, and provided it has been cost 
  effective, we will extend it to other users of social services.
Above all, we want to help families to help themselves. Caring for older - or 
disabled - relatives is one of the most natural human instincts. We recognise 
the crucial and often demanding role carers play, and will help them more. 
  We will introduce a Respite Care Programme. This will enable family members 
  with heavy responsibilities caring for a relative to take a much needed break. 
  We will also offer more practical advice for carers who want to go back to 
  paid work.
But in some cases, elderly people need more care than their friends or relatives 
can provide. Financing long term care worries many families. We will create an 
imaginative, fair partnership between individuals and the public sector to 
resolve this problem. 
  In the first session of the next Parliament we will implement our partnership 
  scheme for long term care, making it easier for people to afford the cost of 
  care in old age without giving up their lifetime savings.
Good preparation for marriage can be an important aid to a successful family, 
while timely help in meeting difficulties can often avoid family breakdown. 
These are matters for voluntary effort, not the state, but we will continue to 
support such effort. 
We need to make sure efforts to help struggling families does not turn into 
unnecessary meddling. 
When the state goes too far, it is often the children who suffer They become 
victims of the worst sort of political correctness. 
  We will introduce legislation to remove unnecessary barriers to adoption and 
  introduce new rules to make adoption from abroad more straightforward.
  We will also monitor the workings of the Children Act, and act if necessary to 
  ensure it maintains a proper balance between the rights of children and the 
  responsibilities of adults.
Social Services departments are now the fourth arm of the welfare state. Most 
people will need them at some point in their lives. We will ensure that the 
Conservative revolution in public services now reaches Social Services. 
Disabled People
We have quadrupled real spending on long term sick and disabled people since 
1979, to £22 billion. 
We have introduced the Disability Discrimination Act. This is the first 
legislation of its kind anywhere in Europe and it provides positive proof of our 
commitment to disabled people. We will monitor it to ensure it continues to meet 
its objectives. 
We are also providing a continuing fund to enable the most severely disabled 
people to stay in their own homes. 
Security in Retirement
Pensioners continue to make a positive contribution to society in retirement. 
They give more of their time in charitable work than any other age group. They 
lift some of the pressures on their own families. They help keep our nation's 
history and traditions alive. 
They have paid their National Insurance contributions and taxes and rightly 
expect us to continue to protect the value of the basic state pension against 
price rises. We will do so. We will also ensure that less well off pensioners 
continue to get extra help on top of the basic pension. 
At the same time as protecting the state pension, our encouragement of private 
pensions is already transforming the living standards of pensioners. The average 
net income of pensioners has risen by 60% since 1979. This has been achieved by 
our encouragement of saving for retirement. 
The tax system must help pensioners who have saved. Our new lower 20p rate on 
income from savings directly helps 1.7 million pensioners and the special age 
allowances raise the point at which pensioners start to pay income tax. 
A Better Social Security System
People in need can rely on our continuing support. To ensure that taxpayers are 
willing to go on paying for that support, we have shaped a social security 
system we can afford, taking a steadily declining share of our national income. 
We are doing this by focusing benefits on those most in need, helping people off 
welfare and into work, and curbing welfare fraud. These policies are underpinned 
by our measures to help families help themselves. 
Social Security must be there to help families, pensioners and people in need. 
We will protect the value of Child Benefit and Family Credit which help with the 
cost of bringing up children. This is our Family Benefits Guarantee. 
We will bring the structure of benefits for lone parents into line with that for 
two-parent families. We will continue to help lone parents obtain maintenance, 
and assist with childcare in work: both these measures help lone parents obtain 
work. We will pilot our "Parent Plus" Scheme that gives special help to lone 
parents who want to work, and extend it if it proves successful. 
Social Security fraud must be stamped out. 
  We will intensify our current initiatives of inspections and checks, including 
  more home visits, to crack down further on benefit cheats. We will introduce 
  benefit cards across the country. We will establish a Benefit Fraud 
  inspectorate to monitor local authorities' performance. We will also improve 
  the sharing of information between government departments to catch more 
  fraudulent claims.
To ensure as much of the Social Security budget as possible goes into benefits, 
we will continue to improve the efficiency of administration, using the best mix 
of public and private sector operations. 
Housing
 Owning one's own home is an aim shared by millions of people. Over the last 18 
years, the number of homeowners has increased by 4.7 million - including 1.7 
million who have bought their home under the right to buy scheme. Over the next 
10 years, we expect to see another one and a half million people buying their 
own homes - some 3,000 every week. To meet that demand, we will continue to 
allow local authority and housing association tenants to buy their homes, or 
move to houses which they buy. 
  We will also carry through our draft Bill, creating the option for those 
  buying flats to choose a new form of commonhold ownership.
For those who wish to rent their home, we are encouraging a thriving private 
rental market, building on the success of housing investment trusts and 
protecting assured tenancies. 
Easier renting will help us meet our target of reducing the proportion of empty 
homes below 3%. The number of empty houses has fallen in each of the last 3 
years. But nothing is more frustrating for people who need social housing, than 
the sight of a suitable property owned by the public sector boarded up and 
empty. We will stop that. 
  Public landlords will have to sell houses which are available for occupation 
  yet have been left empty without a good reason for more than 12 months.
Housing associations and housing companies will continue to receive help in 
building new homes, and we will encourage more public-private partnerships. 
Together, these policies will help meet the demand for new public housing and 
make sure that there are decent homes for those in need. 
Opportunities for Women
Women are succeeding in Britain. More women have jobs in Britain than in almost 
any other European country. Women have a better education, more financial 
independence and more opportunities than at any other time in Britain's history. 

This success reflects the efforts and determination of many women. Government's 
role has been simpler - to level up the playing field, whether in education, 
where girls are now doing better than boys, or in the workplace, where 
opportunities for women are the best in Europe. 
But we know our job is not yet done. Some women still face barriers to doing 
well. Some still do not have the financial security they deserve. And crime, and 
the fear of crime, often affect women more than men. 
We will ensure women have equal opportunities in education and the workplace. 
This can best be achieved by keeping our economy buoyant and our labour markets 
flexible. And our proposals to bring crime rates down further will help women 
especially. 
But many women - and some men -face a particular problem: how to juggle job and 
family. For those who need or want to work, we will seek further ways to 
minimise the barriers to affordable, high quality childcare. For those who wish 
to be full-time parents, our proposals to enable them to transfer their unused 
personal allowance to their spouse will be worth up to an extra £17.50 a week. 
We also want to give women more financial independence, particularly when they 
retire. We propose, as explained elsewhere, to improve flexibility in saving for 
retirement and to allow courts to split pensions on divorce. 
Looking Outwards
The spread of share ownership, the transformation of pension provision, and the 
sale of council houses are revolutionising our nation. Personal prosperity and 
property ownership are not selfish or inward-looking. 
People who are secure at home can look out for others in their community. Over 
two thirds of adults engage in some form of voluntary activity. By the end of 
1997 all young people aged between 15 and 25 who want to volunteer will be 
helped to find an opportunity to do so. 
  We will make it easier for those receiving incapacity benefit to volunteer by 
  removing the 16 hour weekly limit on their voluntary work.
We will encourage voluntary work by others living on benefit while continuing to 
insist that those who are capable of work should actively seek employment. We 
will also develop accreditation for voluntary work to encourage employers to see 
it as preparation for a paid job. 
It is wrong to imagine that compassion must be nationalised and that we can only 
help our fellow man through state action. 
4. Education and Opportunity
All children dream of what they might do when they grow up. Our task is to help 
them turn those dreams into reality whatever their background may be. It is an 
exciting world, full of new opportunities for inquiring minds: it should be open 
to every child. Their future - and Britain's prosperity - depends on the quality 
of their education. 
Our Education Guarantee
 A good education is the birthright of every child. Literacy is the building 
block of all future learning: English is the global language of commerce and, 
much more, a thing of beauty. Without basic science and mathematics, the modern 
world is incomprehensible. Every child therefore must be taught to read, write 
and add up from an early age. 
Years of mistaken, progressive education in the 1960s and 1970s denied these 
precious skills to too many children. We have worked ceaselessly since 1979 to 
put that right. Our decision to test children and publish the results has 
allowed standards to be measured and exposed. We have reformed the curriculum, 
toughened inspections, and given more information and power to parents. Our many 
excellent teachers now know what is expected of them, and already standards in 
schools are rising. But they are still not good enough. We must do more. 
Building on what we have done, we can now offer a new pledge to parents - a 
guarantee of education standards. 
  First, we will set national targets for school performance that reflect our 
  objective of ensuring that Britain is in the top league of international 
  standards across the whole spectrum of education.
  Second, we will require every school to plan how to improve its performance, 
  and to set targets which relate to similar schools and national standards.
  Third, we will give all parents full information on the performance of their 
  child's school
  Fourth, to underwrite our pledge, we will ensure action is taken to bring any 
  under-performing school up to the mark.
We will meet this pledge by using the full set of levers for improved standards 
that we have put in place. 
We are revising and simplifying the National Curriculum in primary schools to 
emphasise high standards in the basic skills. 
Parents and teachers must have an overview of not just how much a child has 
learnt while at school, but how the school performs against others. Poor 
schooling must not be protected by a veil of secrecy. Parent power is a vital 
force for higher standards. 
Regular tests and exams are essential if teachers are to discover how much their 
pupils have learnt, and parents are to know how much progress their children are 
making against national standards. That is why children are already being tested 
at 7, 11 and 14. 
  We will publish all school test results, including the results of tests of 7 
  and 14 year olds.
  We propose also to assess every child at five.
This will give teachers and parents a benchmark against which they can measure 
future progress. To give a better measure of pupil's performance, marks out of 
100 will be made available to parents as well as the broad-brush levels. 
  We will also introduce a new test for 14 year old children that covers the 
  whole National Curriculum - assessing progress before they choose subjects for 
  GCSE.
Tests and exams need to be rigorous and demanding. We will insist that they 
establish children's command of spelling, punctuation, and grammar in English 
tests. Children will sit arithmetic tests without calculators. We will not allow 
such extensive use of open books in tests and in GCSE exams. We will establish 
an English Language GCSE. We will continue to uphold the gold standard of 
A-levels, and ensure that the great classics of our literature are studied at 
A-level. At the same time students should have the chance to study more subjects 
in the sixth form. 
Rigorous tests show how individual children and schools are performing and 
expose schools that are not giving children the education they deserve. To 
underwrite our guarantee, we will then take action to improve standards. We 
cannot tolerate schools that fail their pupils. 
By this summer every secondary school in the country will have been inspected by 
independent inspectors, and by summer 1998, every primary school will have been 
inspected as well. We have the power to take over failing schools directly and 
close them if necessary We will now go further and require every school to set, 
and publish, regular targets, and plans for improving their academic results. 
Independent inspectors will monitor the results of weaker schools and their 
plans for improvement at regular intervals. 
Sometimes, though, schools are failing because the local education authority 
which runs them is failing. The authorities with the worst GCSE results and the 
worst results at Key Stage 2 (11 year olds) are run by Labour. Those children 
need our help. 
  We will allow for on independent inspection of education authorities and 
  intervene directly to raise standards where education authorities are letting 
  children down.
Failing authorities will be required to set out their plans to raise standards, 
and work with education teams - directed by independent inspectors - to 
implement those plans. 
The vast majority of teachers do an outstanding job. They have played a key part 
in implementing the reforms that we have introduced. A few, though, let their 
pupils down. 
  We will establish a more rigorous and effective system of appraising teachers, 
  which reflects how well their pupils perform in tests and exams: this will 
  identify which teachers need more help and, where necessary, which teachers 
  need to be replaced.
Many feel that the professional standing of teachers would be strengthened by 
the creation of a single body which could speak with authority on professional 
standards. We will consult with teachers and other interested parties about the 
possible role of such a body. 
The school should be a place of stability and stimulation for children, 
especially if they come from a hostile or turbulent environment. To improve 
standards in future our new teacher training curriculum will stress traditional 
teaching methods -including whole class teaching and learning to read by the 
sounds of letters. We will also encourage more teachers to enter the profession 
through practical training schemes focused on classroom experience such as the 
Graduate Teacher Scheme. A child is likely to learn more in a well-ordered 
school. Teachers must have the powers they need to maintain discipline. We will 
give teachers greater power to set detentions, to exclude disruptive pupils and 
to use reasonable physical restraint where necessary. 
Schools also have an important role to play in spiritual and moral education. We 
will take steps to ensure that every school fulfils its role of providing 
religious education and collective worship. 
Choice and Diversity
When we came to power in 1979 the school system was totally dominated by one 
type of school - the monolithic comprehensive. The system failed our children. 
It treated every child the same. It told parents where to send their children. 
It did not give schools the freedom to run their own affairs. 
Since 1979 we have created a rich diversity of schools, to serve the varied 
talents of all children and give parents choice within that diversity, because 
we believe that parents know what is best for their children. 
That is why we - and only we - are committed to giving the parent of every four 
year old child a voucher for nursery education so they can choose the pre-school 
education they want for their child, whether in a play-group, a reception class, 
or a nursery school in the private or state sector. 
We will give more talented children, from less well-off backgrounds, the 
opportunity to go to fee-paying schools by expanding the Assisted Places Scheme 
to cover all ages of compulsory education, in line with our current spending 
plans. We propose to develop it further into a wider scholarship scheme covering 
additional educational opportunities. The freedoms and status of fee-paying 
schools will be protected. 
Grant-maintained schools have been popular with parents across the country 
-whatever their politics. We will encourage more schools to become 
grant-maintained and will allow new grant-maintained schools to be set up where 
there is sufficient local demand. We will give all grant-maintained schools 
greater freedoms to expand and to select their pupils. 
Grant-maintained schools are leading the way. Local authority schools are also 
benefitting from our policy of local management of schools. Our ultimate 
objective is that all schools should take full responsibility for the management 
of their own affairs. In the next parliament we will take another step towards 
giving them that freedom. 
  We will extend the benefits of greater self-governance to all LEA schools. We 
  will require local authorities to delegate more of schools' budgets to the 
  schools themselves. We will give them more freedom over the employment of 
  their staff and over admissions. And, where they want it, we will allow them 
  to take over ownership of their assets, so they can make best use of the 
  resources.
Local authorities will continue to be responsible for their schools' standards. 
They will provide funds, and compete with other organisations to provide 
services to schools. We would expect the increased responsibility of 
head-teachers, and their role in achieving efficiency-savings, to be recognised 
by their pay review body. 
Schools are stronger and more effective where head-teachers and governors can 
shape their own distinctive character Sometimes that means developing a 
speciality in some subjects. Sometimes it means selecting children by their 
aptitudes: where parents want this we should not stand in their way. Special 
abilities should be recognised and encouraged. 
  We will continue to encourage the establishment of more specialist schools in 
  technology, arts, languages and sport. We aim to help one in five schools 
  become specialist schools by 2001.
  We will allow all schools to select some of their pupils.
  We will help schools to became grammar schools in every major town where 
  parents want that choke.
The high standards, real choice and genuine diversity which we have introduced 
will produce the best results for all our children. 
Lifetime Learning
Lifetime learning is a reality in Britain today. Over a half of all students in 
universities, and seventy per cent of those in further education colleges, are 
adults who have returned to education later in life. We will continue to create 
new opportunities for more people to participate. 
There has been a revolution in further and higher education. Three and a half 
million people are in further education -up from just half a million in 1979. 
The number of young people going to university has risen from one in eight to 
one in three over the same period. 
We will ensure consistently high standards and will consult on the development 
of higher education when we receive the results of the Dearing Review. We have 
world class research in British universities which we will continue to support. 
Every young person should have the opportunity to continue in education or 
training. 
  We will give students between 14 and 21 a learning credit which will enable 
  them to choose suitable education or training leading to recognised 
  qualifications up to A levels or their equivalents.
We will also introduce National Traineeships and encourage employers to offer 
more work-based Modern Apprenticeships to young people. Objective external 
assessments of a proper syllabus will be made a part of all National Vocational 
Qualifications. 
We will continue to support the network of Training and Enterprise Councils, 
which have created a valuable partnership between business and government. We 
will encourage more employers to become involved in "Investors in People", with 
the public sector matching the performance of the private sector. 
Competitive markets demand high skills. If Britain is to win, we need to 
encourage learning and give people the opportunity to go where their interests 
and inquiring minds take them. 



World Class Health and Public Services
Our Record - Health and Public Services 
  Government spending has concentrated on priorities, not wasteful bureaucracy 
  and overmanning. Despite tough overall public spending plans, real spending on 
  the NHS has risen nearly 75% since 1979 , on schools by 50% and on the police 
  by more than 100%. 
  The Health Service is treating over 1 million more patients each year than 
  before our reforms. 
  The number of people waiting over 12 months for hospital treatment has fallen 
  from over 200,000 in 1990 to 22,000 last year. The average wait has fallen 
  from nearly 9 months to 4 months. 
  The Government has set up the Citizen's Charter to provide first class public 
  services for all citizens. Nearly 650 organisations have received a Charter 
  Mark for meeting demanding standards of performance, customer satisfaction and 
  value for money. 
  There are now 55,000 more nurses and midwives and 22,500 more doctors and 
  dentists than in 1979. For every senior NHS manager, 77 people are providing 
  direct patient care. 
  Nurses average earnings have grown 70% in real terms: from £68 a week in 1979 
  to £325 in 1995. Doctor's pay has risen by a third. Under Labour both were 
  cut. 
  Infant mortality has fallen from 13.2 to 6.2 per thousand over the last 18 
  years. 
  Deaths through road accidents are now the lowest since records began in 1926. 
  Since 1979 road deaths and serious casualties have fallen by 43% despite an 
  85% increase in motor traffic. 
  The government has invested record amounts on transport - more than £26 
  billion since 1979 in investment on motorways and trunk roads; £16 billion in 
  investment on railways; and £8 billion in investment on London Transport. 
  Privatisation is delivering better services at lower costs. BT's main prices 
  are down by more than 40% in real terms. Average household bills for gas and 
  electricity have also fallen in real terms since 1990. 
5. Security in Health
We have been the guardians of the NHS for most of its life, improving its 
services and securing its funding. The benefits can be seen in our rising 
standards of health. 1993 was for example the first year in which no child in 
this country died of measles. Between 1979 and 1995 life expectancy at birth in 
England has increased from 70.4 years to 74.3 years for men and from 76.4 years 
to 79.6 years for women. We are getting healthier and we are better looked after 
when we are sick. 
Growing Resources for a Modern Health Service 
This progress has been possible because we have increased spending since 1979 by 
nearly 75% more than inflation, to almost £43 billion. And we are not stopping 
there. The next Conservative Government will honour a firm guarantee to the NHS. 

  We will continue, year by year; to increase the real resources committed to 
  the NHS, so NHS spending will continue to share in a growing economy
Under Labour there have been years when resources for the NHS actually shrank - 
something that would be inconceivable with the Conservatives. 
Money is only really a means to an end: better patient care. Now we are treating 
9.2 million hospital in-patients and day cases as against 6.9 million in 1992 
and 5.1 million in 1979. 
Investing in Skilled Staff
 We are committed to expanding the medical staff of the NHS. We shall therefore 
increase medical school intakes to 5,000 a year by the year 2000 and are ahead 
of schedule in reaching the target. 
Good nursing is the bedrock of the NHS. In particular we will increase the 
number of nurses with specialist qualifications in paediatric intensive 
care,emergency care, and cancer care. The number of nurses qualifying each year 
will increase by 2,500 within the next 5 years as we continue to expand Project 
2000 training. 
Higher Standards of Service
 We are tackling the problem of long waiting times which can cause so much 
worry; distress, and pain. We have set tough targets under the Patient's Charter 
and as a result average waiting times for in-patient hospital treatments have 
fallen from more than 6 months 5 years ago to 4 months last year. 
Patients no longer put up with being kept in ignorance. They want to know more. 
  We will publish more information on how successfully hospitals are treating 
  patients so that they and their GPs can make more informed choices between 
  services in different hospitals and help stimulate better performance
Better Primary Care
Our vision of the NHS is one in which hospitals and family doctors gain greater 
power to run their own affairs. That is why we will continue to encourage the 
spread of fundholding among GPs. Labour by contrast would destroy the new 
freedoms that fundholding doctors enjoy by imposing a new layer of bureaucracy 
on top of them. 
However, we do not want the benefits of better healthcare to be confined to 
patients of GP fundholders. Our proposals to shift more healthcare towards 
family doctors are open to all 
  We shall implement the new Primary Care Act which will enable all family 
  doctors to provide a broader range of patient services within their surgeries. 
  This will include ("super surgeries" and practice-based cottage hospitals that 
  can offer faster and more local treatment.
We expect to see the number of nurses working in GP practices continue to grow, 
as will the number of GPs. 
  We will extend nationwide our plans to enable more nurses to prescribe a wider 
  range of drugs for patients, recognising their contribution to primary care.
Mental Health
The last decade has also seen major changes in the care of mentally ill people. 
We will continue to develop a full range of services - including 24-hour nursed 
hostels and secure units - that can care for them in a way which is most 
appropriate to them and the interests of the wider community. 
  We will not dose any long-stay mental hospitals unless it can be shown that 
  adequate care services exist in the community.
We will strengthen co-operation between health and social services in the 
delivery of mental health services. Our recent Green Paper showed how this can 
be done. And we will monitor the progress of Health Authorities in developing 
proper mental health care plans. 
Health of the Nation
A modern health service is not just about treating illness, it is also about 
keeping people healthy. This is why we launched the Health of the Nation 
strategy in 1992 - the first time England has had a strategy for health. Its aim 
is to reduce illness and premature death by identifying common causes of ill 
health, like excessive smoking and obesity. Different groups in and outside the 
health service then work together to tackle the problems. 
We are already seeing progress. Between 1990 and 1994, deaths from coronary 
heart disease among the over-65s, the suicide rate, and the number of teenage 
pregnancies fell substantially And last year we announced that environmental 
targets would be added to Health of the Nation. 
Improved general health means fewer people requiring attention in hospitals and 
GP surgeries - and more resources available for patients who need them. Our 
Health of the Nation strategy is a vital part of our vision for creating a 
health service fit for the 21st Century. 
A Modern Health Service
Healthcare is changing fast. Modern technology is constantly increasing the 
range of treatments which are available. Conservatives believe that the benefits 
of these advances should be made available to patients on the basis of their 
clinical need, without regard to their ability to pay. 
Furthermore we also believe that the NHS must have access to sufficient 
resources to allow it to invest in the facilities required to deliver up-to-date 
healthcare. Since 1979 capital investment in the NHS has proceeded at an 
unprecedented rate. In the future we believe these requirements will be best met 
in a partnership with the private sector which allows the private sector to 
improve the facilities in which NHS healthcare is delivered. 
  We will promote the Private Finance Initiative which will unleash a new flow 
  of investment funds into the modernisation of the NHS.
The NHS is a British success story. It commands universal support in Britain. It 
is widely admired all over the world. Conservatives are proud of the part we are 
playing in improving the NHS still further. 
6. Better Public Services
The public sector is being transformed the world over. Britain is in the 
vanguard. Everyone else wants to learn from our vision of a smaller state doing 
fewer things and doing them better. 
Old style public services were centrally planned with little information or 
choice for the public who used the service. Our reforms have made these services 
more responsive to the public by breaking up cumbersome bureaucratic structures 
and shifting power to small responsive local institutions and the people who 
work in them. The schools, hospitals and police have all been transformed in 
this way. We support the people who do, not the people who plan. 
In order to get better standards we are liberating services from centralised 
control over capital. We will push forward our Private Finance Initiative to 
break down these old barriers. 
We have made public services genuinely accountable, with useful information and 
real choices for the people who use them. We set tough standards and they will 
get tougher. The Citizen's Charter has raised standards of customer service. 
When these high standards are reached we recognise and reward excellence through 
our Charter Mark initiative. There are now 647 Chartermarks and we will aim for 
more than 2000 Chartermarks by the year 2000. 
  We will require all government agencies to apply for Chartermarks.
The days of the bureaucratic paperchase are behind us. The future is "government 
direct". We will harness the latest information technology to place the public 
sector directly at the service of the citizen. People will be able to use simple 
computer terminals to enter information directly. This will transform 
time-consuming transactions like completing a tax return or registering a new 
business. 
Privatisation and Competition

In 20 years, privatisation has gone from the dream of a few Conservative 
visionaries to the big idea which is transforming decaying public sector 
industries in almost every country in the world. Britain has led the way with 
this new industrial revolution: we can be proud of what we have achieved. 
In 1979 the Government inherited a range of businesses which had come into the 
public sector for different reasons. Many were known for their poor standards of 
service, and most were making large losses. 
Over the past eighteen years that situation has changed substantially. 
Privatisation has enhanced productivity, improved customer services, raised 
safety and environmental standards and substantially reduced prices. 
Telephone, gas and electricity bills to the customer have fallen as never 
before. Telephone waiting lists are unknown, and water, gas and electricity 
disconnections have fallen dramatically. Nearly £40 billion in private sector 
funding has been committed to a major investment programme to meet higher 
quality water standards. We can now look forward to water prices falling over 
the years ahead. 
Service standards have improved substantially. Before privatisation published 
service standards did not exist. Now industry regulators monitor legal 
requirements to provide quality services in a competitive environment. Refunds 
may be made when performance standards are not met. 
Privatisation has benefitted - and will continue to benefit - consumers, 
shareholders, employees, and taxpayers. In 1979 the then-nationalised industries 
required a £50 million per week subsidy from the taxpayer In 1996 those now 
privatised companies paid taxes of £60 million per week. 
  We will ensure private ownership, competition and regulation continue to 
  deliver lower prices and better services for consumers.
  We will extend competition for domestic gas users, and introduce competition 
  in the water industry, starting with large users.
The Post Office occupies an important part in national life. It comprises 
Counter Services, the Royal Mail and Parcelforce. The network of sub-post 
offices is vital and most are already run as private businesses. The Royal Mail 
provides a universal service at a standard price in every part of the United 
Kingdom. No one can imagine a stamp that does not bear the Queen's head. These 
characteristics must continue, but reforms are needed to allow the services to 
develop. The Royal Mail must face up to the challenges and opportunities that 
are arising from increasing competition and the international liberalisation of 
services. 
  We will guarantee to preserve the national identity, universal service and 
  distinctive characteristics of the Royal Mail, while considering options - 
  including different forms of privatisation - to introduce private capital and 
  management skills into its operations.
  We will transfer Parcelforce to the private sector whilst ensuring that every 
  Post Office in the land continues to provide a full parcel service at an 
  economical price
Privatisation works. We will therefore continue to pass government activities 
into private ownership where this can bring benefits to consumers and taxpayers. 

Local Government
We are developing a new vision for local government. 
We believe local government should take a lead in the planning and development 
of their communities. To achieve that, we have encouraged them to work in 
partnership with central government, with private enterprise, and other 
organisations in their community. The impact of local government is multiplied 
when they work in this way. 
To encourage this partnership, we have developed the new approach of Challenge 
Funding. We set up a fund to meet a particular objective and then invite 
competing bids for the money. Those who form effective partnerships are far more 
likely to win those bids. The Single Regeneration Budget Fund, for example, has 
stimulated many working partnerships that are bringing new life to their 
communities. 
  We will push Challenge Funding further to reward effective local government.
This innovation has the potential to transform the financing of the public 
sector. 
In addition, we are encouraging higher standards and more cost-effective 
provision of local services. Local authorities can enable things to happen 
rather than necessarily running them themselves. They must look after the 
interests of users of their services - and that is often best done by being a 
purchaser, not an employer. 
Standards of service are rising in many local authorities. There are, however, 
still great disparities between the best and worst performers, as the Audit 
Commission shows in their thought-provoking reports. 
  We will keep up the pressure for higher standards and improved value for money 
  by insisting on compulsory competitive tendering.
The development of Challenge Funding and the shift in the role of local 
authorities from direct employers to purchasers of services will transform local 
authorities over the coming years. In the meantime we will, for so long as is 
necessary, retain the power to cap local authorities to protect taxpayers. 
Strikes in Essential Services
Industrial relations in this country have been transformed. In so far as there 
is a still a problem it is concentrated in a few essential services where the 
public has no easy alternative and strikers are able to impose massive costs and 
inconvenience out of all proportion to the issues at stake. We will protect 
ordinary members of the public from this abuse of power. 
  We will legislate to remove legal immunity from industrial action which has 
  disproportionate or excessive effect Members of the public and employers will 
  be able to seek injunctions to prevent industrial action in these 
  circumstances. Any strike action will also have to be approved by a majority 
  of all members eligible to vote and ballots will have to be repeated at 
  regular intervals if negotiations are extended.
Transport
Our railways are already improving now they have been liberated into the private 
sector Passenger numbers are up: more people are using the railways every day. 
Investment is up: Railtrack plans to spend £4 million each day on improving 
stations and maintaining and renewing the network. The new train operators are 
committed to investing £1.5 billion in new and refurbished rolling stock. And 
key fares are set to fall in real terms for the first time in a generation, with 
guaranteed price controls keeping fare increases below the level of inflation 
until at least 2003. We intend to build on this growing success story to create 
a thriving railway network for the new century. 
  We will complete the successful transfer of British Rail into the commercial 
  sector
We now want to draw in private investment to modernise London Underground and 
improve services to passengers. 
  We will bring forward plans to privatise London Underground. Proceeds from 
  privatisation will be recycled in order to modernise the network within 5 
  years - creating an underground system to serve the capital in the 21st 
  Century. We will regulate fares so they rise by no more than inflation for at 
  least 4 years after privatisation. We will also protect services - including 
  the Travel Card and concessionary fares.
After completing the modernisation of the network, the majority of the remaining 
surplus from privatisation will be channelled into additional support for 
transport investment in London and elsewhere in the country. 
We will continue to encourage public transport. In particular, we will use the 
existing funding for local authorities to promote developments which make it 
easier to interchange between bus and rail. 
We recognise the needs of road users, and will continue to work with the private 
sector to sustain our road building and maintenance programme. Already under the 
Private Finance Initiative the private sector is contributing some £1 billion to 
investment in roads and achieving significant savings in construction costs. We 
will also tackle road congestion by introducing new regional traffic control 
centres, by extending the use of variable speed limits, and by ensuring that 
local authorities have the necessary powers to act. We will promote a cleaner 
environment by supporting a Europe-wide reduction in vehicle emissions, and 
encouraging the manufacture of more fuel-efficient vehicles. 
We will continue to build on our record of improving safety on roll-on roll-off 
ferries and cargo ships through higher standards of survivability and the 
measures in the Merchant Shipping Act. 
We will continue to make it easier for people to travel by air Already over the 
last 5 years opening up the market in Europe has led to more services and lower 
fares. We will build on that success in negotiations with the United States and 
other countries. We will also continue to encourage the development of regional 
airports offering new direct services to the rest of the world in the same way 
that we have already opened up new regional links with Europe and the United 
States. We will privatise the National Air Traffic Service because it will be 
run better in the private sector. 
Competition and enterprise are the best way to improve our transport system. 




A Safe and Civil Society
Our Record - A Safe and Civil Society 
  Spending on the police has doubled since 1979 after allowing for inflation. 
  There are now about 16,000 more police officers than when we took office. 
  2,360 more constables have been recruited since the last election and the 
  Government is giving Chief Officers the resources to recruit 5,000 police 
  constables over the 3 years to 1999. 
  Recorded crime has dropped in each of the last 4 years. It is now over 10% 
  down on 1992 levels - more than half a million fewer offences - the biggest 
  drop since records were first kept. 
  There are now 153,000 Neighbourhood Watch schemes in England and Wales - 
  38,000 more than in 1992 - covering 5.5 million homes. We have helped fund 
  over 4,000 closed circuit TV schemes over the last 2 years for additional 
  security. 
  Our national DNA database - the first in the world - now has over 112,000 
  samples on it. 3,300 matches have so far been made between suspects and crime 
  stains. 
  The Government has increased the maximum penalty for taking a gun to a crime 
  and for attempted rape to life imprisonment. Since 1985 the average sentence 
  for violence against the person has risen by a third and for sexual offences 
  by nearly 40%. 
  The number of cars stolen has fallen by nearly 20% in the last four years - 
  that is about 100,000 fewer cars stolen. 
  We have built 22 new prisons since 1980. Slopping out has ended. No prisoners 
  now sleep three to a cell designed for one. Prison escapes have fallen by 80% 
  since the last election. 
  Mandatory drug testing has been introduced throughout the Prison Service. Home 
  leave has been cut back - down by half in two years. 
  We have made witness intimidation a crime. 500 people were charged with that 
  offence in 1995 alone. 
  We have stepped up the fight against drugs and organised crime, giving the 
  Security Service powers to support the police and Customs and Excise in 
  tracking down the serious criminals. 
7. Law, Order and Security
 People have a right to sleep safely in their homes and walk safely on the 
streets. Governments have a duty to maintain that security. 
Our reforms are aimed at ensuring that crime does not pay. And they are working 
- the pessimists and the scoffers are wrong. Recorded crime has fallen every 
year for the last 4 years. It is now 10% lower than it was in 1992. That is over 
half a million fewer crimes - the biggest drop since records were first kept in 
the middle of the 19th century. 
But crime is still too high. We must do more. Our aim is to keep crime falling 
over the lifetime of the next parliament. This is what we will do. 
Safer Communities
Anti-social behaviour and petty crime disrupt communities and spread human 
misery. The police are rightly now vigorously tackling problems such as graffiti 
vandalism and drunkenness. Where such behaviour goes unchecked more serious 
crimes will follow. 
  We will support chief constables who develop local schemes to crack down on 
  petty crime and improve public order.
Closed circuit television has proved enormously successful in increasing public 
safety. 
  We will fulfil the Prime Minister's pledge to support the installation of 
  10,000 CCTV cameras in town centres and public places in the 3 years to 1999. 
  We will provide £75 million over the lifetime of the next parliament to 
  continue extending CCTV to town centres, villages and housing estates up and 
  down the country that want to bid for support.
We will also continue to take other steps to improve the safety of our streets 
and communities. In this parliament we have given the police power to seize 
alcohol from under-18s caught drinking in public. The police have been given the 
power to stop and search in a specified area for up to 48 hours if they 
reasonably believe people to be carrying knives. 
Identity Cards can also make a contribution to safer communities. 
  We will introduce a voluntary identity card scheme based on the new 
  photographic driving licence it will, for example, enable retailers to 
  identify youngsters trying to buy alcohol and cigarettes or rent classified 
  videos when they are under age.
Tackling Juvenile Crime
A fifth of all crime is committed by under-18s. We are encouraging schools to 
reduce truancy through the publication of league tables and by supporting local 
projects to tackle the problem. We are developing a network of local teams to 
identify children who are at risk of turning to crime and to take early steps to 
address the factors which put them at risk. 
We will encourage these local child crime teams to refer children from primary 
school age upwards who are at risk of, or who are actually, offending to 
programmes to tackle their behaviour and fully involve their parents. 
  The courts would be able to impose an order - a Parental Control Order - on 
  the parents of children whom they believed could keep control of their 
  children but were refusing to do so.
Courts will be given the power to attach conditions to Parental Control Orders. 
Conditions might include a requirement to keep their children in at night, 
taking their children to and from school, attending a drug rehabilitation clinic 
or going to sessions to improve their skills as parents. Parents who breached 
these conditions - in defiance of the court - would face a range of possible 
sanctions. 
Appearing before a youth court should be a daunting experience for the juvenile 
concerned. All too often it is not. At the moment about a third of all juveniles 
appearing before the youth courts are discharged without any punishment at all 
This sends all the wrong signals to youngsters - particularly first time 
offenders - who then feel they can get away with crime. 
  We will give the courts the power to impose speedy sanctions on youngsters, 
  involving wherever possible an element of reparation to the victim. The 
  probation service - rather than social services - will be responsible for 
  enforcing community punishments for under-16s.
Persistent juvenile offenders need to be properly punished. We are piloting a 
tough new regime, with a heavy emphasis on discipline, at a young offenders 
institution and at the military prison in Colchester In 1994 we doubled the 
maximum sentence for 15-17 year olds to 2 years detention in a young offenders 
institution. We have given the courts the freedom to allow the publication of 
the names of convicted juveniles. We will give the courts the power to detain 
persistent 12-14 year old offenders in secure training centres once the places 
become available. 
We have given the courts the power to impose electronically monitored curfews on 
10 to 15 year old offenders. We will introduce pilots to test their 
effectiveness. If successful we will consider extending them nationwide. 
Catching, Convicting and Punishing
We back the police every inch of the way. There are now about 16,000 more police 
officers - and over 18,000 more civilians helping them - than when we took 
office. We are providing chief constables with the resources to recruit 5,000 
extra police constables in the three years to 1999. 
We support police initiatives to target the hard core of persistent criminals. 
Intelligence is crucial for this. 
  We will establish a national crime squad to provide on improved nationally 
  coordinated approach to organised crime.
Once caught, criminals must be convicted and then properly punished. The public 
needs to be protected. We have reformed the right to silence, despite opposition 
from Labour. The number of suspects refusing to answer police questions has 
nearly halved as a result. 
We have piloted curfew orders for adult offenders. They have been shown to keep 
criminals indoors - curbing their freedom as a punishment - and keeping them out 
of trouble in the meantime. 
  We will extend electronically monitored curfew orders nationwide for those 
  aged 16 and over.
Persistent offenders account for a high proportion of all crime. Prison works - 
not only as a deterrent, but in keeping these criminals off the street. Those 
sent to prison are less likely to re-offend on release than those given a 
community punishment. We will provide another 8,500 prison places by the year 
2000. 
We will introduce minimum sentences for violent and persistent criminals to help 
protect the public more effectively, reversing Labour's wrecking amendments to 
our tough Crime Bill. 
  Anyone convicted of a second serious sexual or violent crime, like rape or 
  armed robbery, will get an automatic life sentence.
  Persistent house burglars and dealers in hard drugs will receive mandatory 
  minimum prison sentences of 3 and 7 years respectively.
  We will restore honesty in sentencing by abolishing automatic early release.
Support for Victims
Concern for the victim must be at the heart of our entire approach to the 
criminal justice system. We will continue to give strong backing to Victim 
Support. 
We will give courts in all cases the discretion to allow witnesses to give 
evidence anonymously if they believe them to be at risk from reprisal. 
  We will also take action to allow a judge to stop a defendant from personally 
  questioning the victim in rape cases and other cases where the victim is 
  particularly vulnerable.
Conservatives are on the side of the victims not the criminal. 
Strengthening the Fight Against City Crime
 Crime that takes place through manipulation of financial accounts and markets 
is as serious as crime on the street. 
The City's unchallenged position as Europe's most dynamic and successful 
financial centre owes a great deal to its reputation for honesty and fair 
dealing. We will help ensure that this reputation is maintained. 
We will bring forward in the next parliament a package of measures designed to 
modernise the current systems for dealing with City fraud. 
This will include legislation to allow the Inland Revenue to pass confidential 
information to the police, the Serious Fraud Office and the financial regulators 
to assist in the investigation of cases involving serious financial fraud. We 
will also remove the remaining legal obstacles to the controlled exchange of 
confidential information between the police and the regulators in this kind of 
case. 
Faster Justice
Justice delayed is justice denied. It is wrong that people who are innocent 
should face an excessive wait before the start of their trial. The guilty must 
be held to account for their actions promptly. And victims should be given the 
chance to draw a line under their experience as quickly as possible. We are 
determined to speed up justice without diminishing the genuine rights of every 
citizen to a fair trial. 
Last October the government set up a review of delays in the criminal justice 
system. It made a series of detailed recommendations. We see merit in those 
recommendations and will seek the views of interested parties. We believe that 
taken together they could dramatically speed up the prosecution process, 
bringing the guilty to justice and acquitting the innocent more quickly. 
All defendants would appear in court the next working day after they were 
charged. At least half of them would be convicted the next day compared with 
just 3 per cent at the moment. And the time taken to bring juveniles to court 
would be cut from 10 weeks to a matter of days. 
Civil Justice
The civil justice system of this country is a vital part of its competitive 
economy and has a high international reputation. The commercial courts attract 
substantial litigation from all over the world, generating significant foreign 
earnings. We will work to maintain the high standing of these courts. 
We have greatly improved the service the civil courts provide for the aggrieved 
citizen. The simple procedure for small claims has been extended to claims up to 
£3,000. For large claims the county court now provides an efficient local 
service with specialised courts in many locations around the country leaving the 
High Court to deal with the more complex and difficult issues. 
We will push ahead with the major reforms now under way which will greatly speed 
up the process and improve the delivery of justice without imposing additional 
burdens on the taxpayer. 
The Legal Profession
We will ensure that the framework in which the legal profession operates is 
responsive to the changing needs of our people and is one in which unjustified 
restrictions have no place. We have, for example, given most solicitors rights 
of audience in the higher courts under appropriate conditions. 
Legal Aid
People are rightly concerned about the rising costs of legal aid. We have taken 
many steps to control the burden and to deny access to legal aid to the 
"apparently wealthy" - those who qualified technically, but whose lifestyles 
suggested they should not. 
But more is required: 
  We will change the structure of legal aid to ensure that it, like other vital 
  public services, functions within defined cash limits.
This will enable us to identify priorities and serve them much more efficiently 
than the present system. 
Drugs
Drugs are a menace to the very fabric of our society They ruin the lives of 
addicts and their families. They can destroy whole neighbourhoods. The promising 
youth of today can too easily become the sad dropouts of tomorrow turning to 
crime and violence. 
The Conservative Government has a comprehensive strategy, launched in 1995, 
committed to fighting drugs in communities and in schools. It is tough on 
criminals and vigilant at our ports. It is respected throughout the world. We 
spend over £500m every year in tackling all aspects of drug problems. 
  We will continue the fight against drugs through a coordinated approach: being 
  tough on pushers; reducing demand by educating young people; tackling drug 
  abuse at local level through Drug Action Teams; saying "No" to legalising 
  drugs; and working with international agencies and foreign governments to 
  resist the menace spreading.
This pernicious evil has to be fought by all of us. 



A Confident, United and Sovereign Nation
Our Record - The Nation 
  Many of our old cities have been rejuvenated through a partnership of public 
  and private investment. 
  The area of green belt has doubled since 1979. 
  Water and air quality in the UK have improved significantly. 
  We are one of only a few nations on course to meet our commitment to return 
  emissions of all greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by 2000. 
  The Lottery has been established as the most successful in the world - raising 
  £3 billion for good causes in a little over 2 years. 
  More support is now given to arts and heritage than at any time in our 
  nation's history. We now provide nearly 20% more for the arts than the last 
  Labour Government, over and above inflation. 
  British talent was this year nominated for 30 Oscars. British music is again 
  receiving international acclaim. The industry is worth £2.5 billion, more than 
  shipbuilding or electric components: one in 5 CDs and records sold anywhere 
  has a British connection. 
  There is record investment in our sports facilities. Already the Lottery has 
  provided £480 million for sport, including the planned British Academy of 
  Sport, English National Stadium and, for the first time, direct funding for 
  British athletes. 
  We have continued to stand up for British interests in Europe, protecting our 
  opt-out from the Social Chapter, maintaining our border controls, and 
  preserving our budget rebate - worth £18 billion since it was introduced. 
  We have the most professional armed forces in the world. We have modernised 
  our nuclear deterrent by replacing Polaris with Trident. 
8. The Best Place in the World to Live
Britain is admired the world oven Every year, millions of tourists travel here 
to enjoy our heritage and culture, our cities and countryside, our way of life. 
Our nation's history is an anchor in a sea of change. We need to protect, 
cherish and build upon what is great about our country so our children grow up 
in a better Britain. We also must make sure that everyone, wherever they live, 
has the support of a strong, tolerant and civilised community. 
Our aim is for this generation and future generations to take pride in Britain 
as the best place in the world to live. 
Britain's Cities
London is one of the world's greatest cities. It is livelier than even Our 
vision of its future is set out in a separate manifesto. 
Many of our cities have undergone a complete transformation over the last 
decade. We have promoted partnerships -through schemes such as Urban Development 
Corporations, the Single Regeneration Budget and City Pride - to attract private 
enterprise and investment back to inner-cities. These initiatives are bringing 
hope, opportunity and prosperity to what were once wastelands of urban decline. 
As the country thrives and becomes more prosperous, one of our central tasks is 
to apply the same approach in transforming the legacy of soulless, decaying 
public housing estates. They are places that suffer from the very worst kind of 
poverty - poverty of aspiration. 
We have already made a start - spending more than £2bn over the last 10 years on 
improving 500 of the worst estates. And we have shown how it is possible to 
tackle the economic and social problems alongside new investment in buildings - 
where possible, bringing in a greater mix of public tenants and private housing 
to recreate a more balanced community. Now we will extend this approach, 
focusing the Single Regeneration Budget to launch a combined attack on crime, 
unemployment and under-achievement, and developing the government's partnership 
with the private sector to help fund the massive investment that will be 
required. 
  Over the next decade, we aim to raise some £25bn of new private investment in 
  housing estates by encouraging tenants in more than half of the remaining 
  public sector housing stock to opt for transferring their homes to new 
  landlords. These transfers will only occur where tenants choose this mute to 
  improve theft estates.
  We will use this approach to regenerate the worst housing estates and 
  transform the lives of those who live in them - targeting support for 
  programmes to improve education standards, employment and crime prevention 
  alongside new private sector investment.
As well as this attack on poor housing, we will continue to help the homeless. 
We will carry through our planned extension of the Rough Sleeper Initiative from 
London to other big cities. 
  We will provide sufficient hostel places to ensure that no-one need sleep out 
  on the streets.
Rural Communities
Britain is blessed with some of the most beautiful countryside in Europe. 
  We need to protect the best of the countryside whilst ensuring good jobs and 
  living conditions for people who live there.
We have to strike a balance: our rural communities must not become rural 
museums, but remain vibrant places to live 
and work. We will make sure government departments work together to ensure that 
balance is kept. 
We will continue to protect the green belt from development, making sure that 
derelict and under-used urban land is developed in preference to greenfield 
sites. 
  We will use the planning system to ensure that more new homes are built on 
  reclaimed sites in our towns and cities. We will aim for more than 60 per cent 
  of all new homes to be built on derelict sites.
This will reduce the pressure to build in our countryside and expand choice 
where it is needed most. 
We will support our rural communities, by giving special rate support to small 
village shops and post offices. The planning system can do more to help too. 
  We will introduce a new Rural Business Use Class to encourage job creation in 
  the countryside.
  We will increase support for schemes which promote care for the countryside - 
  like Countryside Stewardship.
We believe participation in traditional country pursuits, including fishing, is 
a matter for individuals. A Conservative Government will not introduce 
legislation that interferes with the rights of people to take part in these 
activities. 
We will also encourage managed public access to private land - in agreement with 
farmers and landowners - but strongly resist a general right to roam, which 
would damage the countryside and violate the right to private property. 
We aim to double Britain's forest cover over the next fifty years. We will 
continue to encourage tree planting by targeting grants, encouraging investment 
in wood processing, and using new freedoms with the reform of the Common 
Agricultural Policy. 
Agriculture and Fisheries
We will continue to provide robust support to the British beef industry through 
the BSE crisis until its long term strength is restored. We will vigorously 
pursue the eradication of BSE in the United Kingdom, as we have been doing 
successfully for the last eight years. We will spare no efforts in our fight 
against the unwarranted ban on British beef exports. 
Public health and food safety have been the government's top priorities 
throughout the BSE crisis. 
  We will tighten up control over food safety by appointing a powerful and 
  independent Chief Food Safety Adviser and Food Safety Council to advise 
  government
We will continue to push for fundamental reform of the Common Agricultural 
Policy, moving away from production support to measures that will give our 
farmers the opportunity to compete while safeguarding the rural environment. We 
will ensure that no change to the Common Agricultural Policy unfairly 
disadvantages British farmers. 
Fishing is a vital industry in many parts of coastal Britain. We will continue 
our fight to secure a prosperous long term future for the industry and 
sustainable management of our fish stocks. 
  We will insist at the IGC and elsewhere on measures to stop quota hopping and 
  prevent the vessels of other countries from using UK fishing quotas.
The integrity of our 6 and 12 mile fishing limits is not negotiable. We reject 
any idea of a single European fishing fleet. 
We believe that fishermen should have more say in decisions affecting their 
industry We will press the European Commission to establish regional committees 
to give fishermen a direct influence in fishing policy. We will use these 
committees to develop new ways of managing quotas and regulating fisheries which 
are more sensitive to the industry's needs. 
Animal Welfare
A civilised society respects animals. Britain will continue to take the lead in 
improving standards of animal welfare in Europe. In 1995 we secured a major 
breakthrough in the treatment of animals in transport; in 1996 we won victory in 
our campaign to ban veal crates throughout the EU. We are determined that 
standards should continue to rise and that all EU countries should have to meet 
them. 
  We will seek to ensure that all European countries have to raise animal 
  welfare standards.
We are not going to take any risks with rabies. There may however be ways other 
than quarantine which maintain or increase protection for public health, while 
improving the welfare of pets and reducing the costs to travellers. 
  We will publish a Green Paper on rabies protection, setting out all the 
  options including the existing controls, early in the new parliament.
Britain's Environment Britain has an enviable track record in protecting our 
environment. Our rivers, beaches and water are cleaner and we are using our 
energy more efficiently. We are leading the world in reducing the level of the 
"greenhouse gases" that cause global warming and pressing for policies that will 
enable the world to sustain development 
without long-term damage to the environment. Our Green Manifesto is published 
separately. 
We have clear objectives to build on this record. We will set tough, but 
affordable targets, with published environmental strategies to improve air 
quality and banish city smog - with tighter standards on vehicle emissions and 
pollution crackdowns around the country We aim for sustained improvements in 
water quality, at a pace which industry and consumers can afford. We will 
develop labelling of products that gives consumers information to show the 
environmental impact of how they were made. 
In addition, we will continue to use the tax system and other incentives to 
encourage the use of vehicles and fuel which do not pollute the environment. And 
we will continue to explore policies based on the principle of polluter pays: 
those who contaminate land, pollute the environment or produce harmful waste 
should be made responsible for their actions and pay for the consequences. 

Britain - A Tolerant Country
Tolerance, civility and respect have always been hallmarks of our nation. It is 
thanks to them that we have an excellent record in race relations. 
Everybody, regardless of colour or creed, has the right to go about his or her 
life free from the threat of intimidation. We are taking tough action to tackle 
harassment. Under proposals in the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, it will 
be a crime to behave in a way which causes someone else to be harassed. The 
maximum penalty will be 6 months in prison. 
Firm, but fair, immigration controls underpin good race relations. We will 
ensure that, while genuine asylum seekers 
are treated sympathetically, people do not abuse these provisions to avoid 
normal immigration controls. 
A World Leader In Sports, Arts and Culture
Britain is enjoying a cultural renaissance. British music, films, television, 
fashion, art and food are winning plaudits the world oven They add excitement, 
fun and enjoyment to our lives. Our success brings pride to everyone. 
The National Lottery, which John Major set up, will pump billions of pounds into 
Britain's good causes. Its proceeds will weave a new, rich thread of opportunity 
and charity into the tapestry of British life. In addition to benefitting major 
national institutions, about half of the awards are for amounts under £25,000 - 
benefitting local communities up and down the country. We will encourage new 
ways of distributing awards to support the performing arts - through support for 
amateur productions and community events, providing more musical instruments, 
and helping productions tour round the country. 
 The National Lottery will also help us train and promote British sporting 
talent. The English National Stadium and British Academy of Sport, funded by the 
Lottery, will be new focal points for sporting events and excellence. We will 
encourage more young people to play sport by ensuring every school plays a 
minimum level of sport, including competitive sports, and developing a network 
of Sporting Ambassadors - sporting celebrities who will visit schools to inspire 
young people. We will also encourage the Sports Council to use Lottery money to 
employ over 1000 additional community sports coaches to assist in schools. 
  We will encourage the use of Lottery money to train young athletes and 
  artists, with revenue funding for bursaries, concessionary tickets to 
  professional performances and support for young people's organisations and 
  productions.
The development of young talent is important in all fields. 
The Lottery will also fund our Millennium celebrations. They will be 
inspirational as well as enjoyable. We want these be a showcase of British 
excellence. Britain will be able to look back on past achievements with pride, 
and look forward with confidence. 
9. Europe and the World
Britain is a world leader as well as a European nation. Our economic strength, 
our history and our language make us a global trading nation with links right 
around the world. Only the United Kingdom is a member of the European Union, the 
United Nations Security Council, the Commonwealth, NATO and the Group of Seven 
leading industrial nations. In the Gulf, Bosnia, Cyprus and Northern Iraq, John 
Major has shown how our nation can contribute to world peace. 
We will continue to work with international partners to secure peace and 
stability in areas of tension such as former Yugoslavia; in Kashmir; in Cyprus; 
and in the Middle East. We will promote reform of the United Nations to make it 
a more effective organisation for securing international stability. Britain will 
continue to deploy our outstanding Armed Forces as peacekeepers under the United 
Nations. And we will support the aspirations of the Poles, Czechs, Hungarians 
and others to join the European Union and NATO. 
After the transfer of Hong Kong, we will work under the terms of the Joint 
Declaration to help sustain the prosperity and way of life of the people of Hong 
Kong and build on the substantial British interests that will remain. 
We will continue to support the Commonwealth, our unique global network, to 
encourage the spread of democracy; as set out in the Harare Declaration. We will 
focus our aid programme to encourage sustainable development in countries that 
are growing towards self sufficiency under democratic government. We have taken 
the lead in alleviating the burden of debt for the world's poorest countries. We 
also have significant flows of private investment to developing economies. We 
are more than achieving the long term UN target of 1% of GDP for the transfer of 
wealth to less developed countries. We will continue to maintain a significant 
bilateral and multilateral aid programme reflecting the aspiration of meeting 
the UN's target of 0.7% of GDP for aid as a long-term objective. 
We will also continue to provide leadership in Europe and internationally on 
environmental issues, building on the Rio Conference to encourage sustainable 
development - meeting our commitment to reduce Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions by 
10% on 1990 levels by 2010 to prevent climate change. The Prime Minister has 
committed himself to attending the next UN Environmental Conference in June. 
Britain and the European Union
We believe that in an uncertain, competitive world, the nation state is a rock 
of security. A nation's common heritage, culture, values and outlook are a 
precious source of stability. Nationhood gives people a sense of belonging. 
The government has a positive vision for the European Union as a partnership of 
nations. We want to be in Europe but not run by Europe. We have much to gain 
from our membership of the European Union -in trade, in co-operation between 
governments, and in preserving European peace. We benefit from the huge trade 
opportunities that have opened up since Britain led the way in developing 
Europe's single market. We want to see the rest of Europe follow the same 
deregulated, enterprise policies that have transformed our economic prospects in 
Britain. 
However, in June, the nations of the European Union will gather in Amsterdam to 
negotiate possible amendments to the Treaty of Rome. It is a moment of truth, 
setting the direction in which the European Union will go. It will also be 
crucial in ensuring that we have a relationship with the rest of Europe with 
which we can be comfortable. 
  A Conservative Government will seek a partnership of nation states. Some 
  others would like to build a federal Europe. A British Conservative Government 
  will not allow Britain to be part of a federal European state.
The diversity of Europe's nations is its strength. As more nations join the 
European Union, it needs to become flexible not more rigid We must also ensure 
that any developments which only include some members do not work to the 
disadvantage of others. 
Our priorities for Europe's development will be enlargement of the Community, 
completion of the single market, reform of the European Court of Justice, and 
further strengthening of the role of national parliaments. We will seek more 
co-operation between national governments on areas of common interest - defence, 
foreign policy and the fight against international crime and drugs. We also 
believe the European Union itself should do less, but do it better. So we have 
proposed incorporating the principle of subsidiarity - that the European Union 
should only do that which cannot be done by member states acting alone - into 
the Treaty. This is how we are approaching the Inter-Governmental Conference. 
  We will argue for a flexible Europe which fully accommodates the interests and 
  aspirations of all its member states and where any new proposals have to be 
  open to all and agreed by all. We will not accept other changes to the Treaty 
  that would further centralise decision-making, reduce national sovereignty, or 
  remove our right to permanent opt-outs.
  We will retain Britain's veto and oppose further extension of qualified 
  majority voting in order to ensure we can prevent policies that would be 
  harmful to the national interest. We will defend the rights of national 
  parliaments and oppose more powers being given to the European Parliament at 
  the expense of national parliaments.
  We will take whatever steps are necessary to keep our frontier controls. We 
  will resist attempts to change the inter-governmental nature of co-operation 
  in justice and home affairs. We will not accept the development of new legal 
  rights that extend the concept of European citizenship.
Britain's rebate has so far saved British taxpayers £18bn and we will protect 
it. 
 One of the greatest challenges Europe faces is to cut unemployment and make its 
businesses competitive. Here Britain is leading the way. We will continue to 
argue for deregulation and lower costs on Europe's businesses, the policies that 
have helped give Britain one of the strongest economies in Europe. We will not 
put that achievement at risk by signing up to the Social Chapter, which would 
open the door to imposing the high costs of the European social model on British 
business. Once Britain accepted the Social Chapter we could not stop many of 
these damaging policies being imposed on us by qualified majority voting. 
We will insist that any new Treaty recognises that our opt-out from the Social 
Chapter enables Britain to be exempt from the Working Time Directive, and 
prevents any abuse of our opt-out. And we will not accept a new employment 
chapter in any revised Treaty, which would expose British businesses to new 
costs. 
We made it clear in the previous chapter that we will continue to work for 
further reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and the lifting of the 
worldwide ban on British beet and will insist on measures to stop quota hopping 
by foreign fishing vessels. 
Protecting Britain's interests demands tough, experienced negotiation. John 
Major has proved he has these qualities -including the resolve to say no when 
necessary even if that means being isolated. Labour have said they would never 
let Britain be isolated in Europe: they would damage Britain's success by 
undermining our veto, signing up to the Social Chapter and following in others' 
footsteps - even where they lead in the wrong direction. They support policies 
that would fragment the United Kingdom's influence within a Europe of Regions. 
The Liberal Democrats welcome the end of the nation state. Only the 
Conservatives can be trusted to stand up for Britain in Europe: our national 
interest must be protected. 
A Single Currency: Our Referendum Guarantee
The creation of a European single currency would be of enormous significance for 
all European states whether they are members or not. We must take account of all 
the consequences for Britain of such a major development of policy. 
John Major secured for us at Maastricht an opt-out from the commitment to enter 
a single currency. It is only because of this opt-out that we have the right to 
negotiate and then decide whether it is in Britain's interest to join. 
It is in our national interest to take part in the negotiations. Not to do so 
would be an abdication of responsibility. A single currency would affect us 
whether we were in or out. We need to participate in discussions in order to 
ensure the rules are not fixed against our interests. The national interest is 
not served by exercising our option - one way or the other - before we have to. 
For a single currency to come into effect, European economies will have to meet 
crucial criteria. On the information currently available, we believe that it is 
very unlikely that there will be sufficient convergence of economic conditions 
across Europe for a single currency to proceed safely on the target date of 
January 1st 1999. We will not include legislation on the single currency in the 
first Queen's Speech. If it cannot proceed safely, we believe it would be better 
for Europe to delay any introduction of a single currency rather than rush ahead 
to meet an artificial timetable. We will argue this case in the negotiations 
that lie ahead. 
  We believe it is in our national interest to keep our options open to take a 
  decision on a single currency when all the facts are before us. If a single 
  currency is created, without sustainable convergence, a British Conservative 
  government will not be part of it.
  If, during the course of the next parliament, a Conservative government were 
  to conclude that it was in our national interest to join a single currency, we 
  have given a guarantee that no such decision would be implemented unless the 
  British people gave their express approval in a referendum.
Defence in an Unstable World
The old rivalries of the Cold War have been replaced by new tensions. Britain 
must be able to react rapidly to protect our security and interests around the 
globe. 
Our armed forces are the most professional in the world. We have cut unnecessary 
bureaucracy and increased efficiency, and directed money to support our Services 
in the frontline. We have made the changes necessary to adapt our Services to 
the threats which we might now face. We have set out defence plans based on 
stable levels of funding. There is no need for a defence review, which would 
raise fear and uncertainty about the future. 
We will continue to ensure the Services have the modern weapons they need to 
guarantee their superiority against potential aggressors. We will make sure we 
can conduct military operations throughout the world, and develop our capability 
to deploy the three services together and rapidly, including the ability to 
transport heavy equipment into an operational zone. We will take part in 
ballistic missile defence research so we can decide whether we should procure 
any such system for the United Kingdom. 
We will continue to target our efforts on recruiting for the armed forces. We 
will set up an Army Foundation College, which will provide 1,300 places for 16 
and 17 year olds who want to join the Army. We will also enable the reserve 
forces to play a more active role in operations. We appreciate the enormous 
value of cadet forces, and our current plans include resources to encourage 
their further development. 
We will continue to support Britain's defence industry, and we will work with 
companies to identify the technologies of the future. 
NATO will remain the cornerstone of our security. We will resist attempts to 
bring the Western European Union under the control of the European Union, and 
ensure that defence policy remains a matter for sovereign nations. 
10. The Constitution
Alone in Europe, the history of the United Kingdom has been one of stability and 
security; We owe much of that to the strength and stability of our constitution 
- the institutions, laws and traditions that bind us together as a nation. 
Our constitution has been stable, but not static. It has been woven over the 
centuries - the product of hundreds of years of knowledge, experience and 
history. 
Radical changes that alter the whole character of our constitutional balance 
could unravel what generations of our predecessors have created. To preserve 
that stability in future - and the freedoms and rights of our citizens - we need 
to continue a process of evolution, not revolution. 
Conservatives embrace evolutionary change that solves real problems and improves 
the way our constitution works. In recent years we have opened up government, 
devolved power and accountability, and introduced reforms to make parliament 
work more effectively. It is that evolutionary process that we are committed to 
continue. 
Open, Accountable Government
In recent years we have taken significant steps to open up government to public 
scrutiny, and give individuals more information to hold government and public 
services to account. 
We have introduced a code on access to government information, policed by the 
Ombudsman. We have published information on the workings of government 
previously held secret -including the composition of cabinet committees, and the 
structure of the security and intelligence services. We have introduced a new 
civil service code, and reformed the process for public appointments. We are 
pledged to legislate on the commitments in our 1993 White Paper on Open 
Government, including a statutory right of access by citizens to personal 
records held about them by the government and other public authorities. And we 
have set up the Nolan Committee and have implemented its proposals to ensure 
that the highest standards are maintained in public life. 
But our reforms go even wider than that. We have transferred power from central 
bureaucracies to local organisations such as school governors and hospital 
trusts. We have introduced the Citizen's Charter We have also required them to 
publish information on their performance -information which enables the local 
community to keep a check on standards and apply pressure where needed. Wherever 
possible, we are widening competition and choice in public services. We showed 
in Chapter 6 how we wished to push this agenda forward. 
Regional government would be a dangerously centralising measure - taking power 
away from elected local authorities. We wish to go in the opposite direction, 
shifting power to the local neighbourhood - for example, by giving more power to 
parish councils. 
Parliament
Parliament - alongside the Crown and our legal system - is one of the three key 
institutions that uphold our constitution. The supremacy of parliament is 
fundamental to our democracy, and the guarantee of our freedoms. The last 17 
years have seen many changes to strengthen parliament and make it more effective 
- the flourishing of select committees, new procedures to scrutinise European 
legislation, reform of parliament's working day, and a budget that brings 
together tax and spending. 
We have therefore already done much to improve the way parliament works and will 
do more. We have accepted the proposal from the Public Service Select Committee 
and put before the House of Commons a clear new statement of the principles 
underlying ministerial accountability to parliament. 
All these developments have made parliament open to the citizen, and the 
government more accountable. In the next session of parliament we will continue 
this careful reform. 
  To give parliament more time to consider legislation thoroughly we will extend 
  the Queen's Speech to cover not only legislation for the immediate year but 
  also provisional plans for legislation in the year after that
This will mean that more draft bills will be subject to public scrutiny before 
they reach the floor of the House of Commons. It will give select committees 
more time to take evidence and report. And this should also mean better 
legislation. 
We do not believe there is a case for more radical reform that would undermine 
the House of Commons. A new Bill of Rights, for example, would risk transferring 
power away from parliament to legal courts - undermining the democratic 
supremacy of parliament as representatives of the people. Whilst this may be a 
necessary check in other countries which depend upon more formalised written 
constitutions, we do not believe it is appropriate to the UK. 
Nor do we favour changes in the system of voting in parliamentary elections that 
would break the link between an individual member of parliament and his 
constituents. A system of proportional representation would be more likely to 
produce unstable, coalition governments that are unable to provide effective 
leadership - with crucial decisions being dependent on compromise deals hammered 
out behind closed doors. This is not the British way. 
We have demonstrated we are not against change where it is practical and 
beneficial. But fundamental changes which have not been fully thought through - 
such as opposition proposals on the House of Lords - would be extremely 
damaging. We will oppose change for change's sake. 
The Union
The Union between Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England underpins our 
nation's stability. The Conservative commitment to the United Kingdom does not 
mean ignoring the distinctive individuality of the different nations. On the 
contrary, we have gone further in recognising that diversity than any previous 
government. We are publishing separate manifestos for Wales and Scotland. 
While preserving the role of parliament at the centre of the Union, we have 
given new powers to the Scottish Grand Committee and Welsh Grand Committee - 
enabling Scottish and Welsh MPs to call Ministers to account and debate 
legislation which affects those countries - something that would be impossible 
with separate Assemblies. For the first time, Welsh members of parliament can 
ask their questions to Ministers in Welsh in Wales. Most recently we have 
similarly extended the basic powers of the Northern Ireland Grand Committee. 
We believe this is the right way to go. By contrast, the development of new 
assemblies in Scotland and Wales would create strains which could well pull 
apart the Union. That would create a new layer of government which would be 
hungry for power. It would risk rivalry and conflict between these parliaments 
or assemblies and the parliament at Westminster. And it would raise serious 
questions about whether the representation of Scottish and Welsh MPs at 
Westminster - and their role in matters affecting English affairs - could remain 
unchanged. 
Nor do we believe it would be in the interests of the Scottish or Welsh people. 
A Scottish tax-raising parliament, for example, could well affect the choice of 
where new investment locates in the United Kingdom. 
In a world where people want security, nothing would be more dangerous than to 
unravel a constitution that binds our nation together and the institutions that 
bring us stability. We will continue to fight for the strength and diversity 
that benefits all of us as a proud union of nations. 
Northern Ireland
While we cherish the Union and Northern Ireland's place within it, we recognise 
that there exist within the Province special circumstances which require further 
action to be taken. 
After a quarter of a century we wish to see the unique and originally temporary 
system of direct rule ended and a successful restoration of local accountable 
democracy achieved. We want to see this brought about in a form which carries 
the broadest agreement possible. And we want to see the rights, traditions and 
interests of all parts of the community recognised within any such agreement. 
We will accordingly continue to pursue a policy of dialogue and negotiation with 
and between the democratic Northern Ireland parties. We will continue to 
underpin such negotiations with the guarantee that the constitutional position 
of Northern Ireland cannot and will not be changed without the broad consent of 
the people of Northern Ireland. At the same time we will continue to take 
whatever security measures are required to protect the people of Northern 
Ireland from those who seek to achieve their political goals by violent means. 
We seek peace. But we will never be swayed by terrorist violence nor will we 
ever compromise our principles with those who seek to overthrow the rule of law 
by force. 
A Choice of Two Futures
At this election the British people face a stark choice. A choice of two 
futures. 
They can elect to continue down the road of success and achievement. An 
opportunity that has been hard won by the efforts and sacrifices of the British 
people. An opportunity that has only come about because successive Conservative 
governments have been determined to face up to the long term problems facing 
Britain, and take the tough steps needed to arrest our slow decline. 
Or they can elect to take a huge risk with that future - the future of 
themselves, their children, their nation - by handing over the government of the 
country to politicians who have fought, opposed and denigrated every step that 
has been taken to restore Britain's economic health and standing in the world. 
Politicians whose own declared policies would burden the United Kingdom with new 
spending and taxation, new regulations, and new threats to the stability and 
sovereignty of the nation itself. 
You can only be sure with the Conservatives.



Our Vision for Britain:
25 Pledges for the Nation 
The Enterprise Centre of Europe 
  TAX AND SPENDING. keep tight control of public spending priorities, aiming for 
  our target of a 20p basic rate of income tax over the next parliament. 
  PRICES AND MORTGAGES. Stick to the policies which have delivered the lowest 
  inflation levels and mortgage rates for a generation, meeting our inflation 
  target of 2½ % or less. 
  JOBS. Protect jobs by keeping Britain out of the European Social Chapter; 
  build on our record of falling unemployment; and help get the long term 
  unemployed back to work - including by requiring those on benefit for some 
  time to undertake work experience on a community project. 
  ENTERPRISE. Support growth and investment by keeping Britain the lowest tax 
  major economy in Europe. pursuing Britain's global trade opportunities. and 
  curbing unnecessary regulations. 
  SMALL BUSINESS. Reform business rates to help small businesses. 
  THE FUTURE. Keep Britain ahead in the technologies of the future. encouraging 
  new entertainment arid information services. and using the Millennium Lottery 
  Fund to give people access to new computers and information links in schools, 
  libraries, arid other public places. 
Opportunity and Ownership for Individuals and Families 
  HELP FOR FAMILIES. Give priority to reducing tax bills for families looking 
  after dependent children or relatives by allowing one partner's unused 
  personal allowance to be transferred to a working spouse where they have these 
  responsibilities. 
  HELP FOR CARERS. Help family members with heavy responsibilities caring for a 
  relative to take a much needed break through a new Respite Care Programme. 
  OWNERSHIP. Encourage schemes that help employees build a shareholding in the 
  company they work for, alongside tax benefits for other savings schemes. 
  PENSIONS. Transform pensions by providing all young people entering the 
  workforce with a personal pension fund paid for by a rebate on their national 
  insurance contributions, while maintaining a state pension guarantee. 
  CARE IN OLD AGE. Make it easier for people to afford the cost of care in old 
  age without giving up their house and savings. 
  SCHOOL STANDARDS. Guarantee school standards by intervening directly to raise 
  standards where schools or local education authorities are letting children 
  down. 
  SCHOOL CHOICE. Widen choice and diversity in schools, with more freedom for 
  schools to develop their own character, more specialist schools, and a grammar 
  school in every town where parents want that choice. We will also maintain our 
  nursery voucher scheme offering a choice of places for parents of all 4 year 
  olds. 
World Class Health and Public Services 
  NHS FUNDING PLEDGE. Continue, year by year, to increase the real resources 
  committed to the NHS, so NHS spending will continue to share in a growing 
  economy. 
  FAMILY DOCTORS. Enable all family doctors to provide a wider range of services 
  in their surgeries and in practice-based cottage hospitals - offering faster 
  and more local treatment. 
  CITIZEN'S CHARTER. Continue to improve the standards and value for money of 
  Britain's public services, giving those who use them more information and, 
  where possible, wider choice. 
  ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Introduce measures to protect the public against strikes 
  that cause excessive disruption to essential services. 
A Safe and Civil Society 
  PUBLIC SAFETY. Support local police schemes to crack down on petty crime, and 
  continue our funding for the installation of TV security cameras in town 
  centres and public places that want them throughout the next parliament. 
  JUVENILE CRIME. Give the courts power to impose speedy sanctions on 
  youngsters, including an element of reparation to the victim; and continue our 
  war against drugs. 
  PERSISTENT CRIMINALS. Ensure persistent house burglars and dealers in hard 
  drugs receive mandatory minimum prison sentences. 
A Confident, United and Sovereign Nation 
  QUALITY OF LIFE. Continue the renaissance of our towns and cities, in 
  particular harnessing private capital to regenerate the worst public housing 
  estates; continue to protect our countryside and heritage; and use the 
  National Lottery to help promote British sports, arts and culture. 
  THE ENVIRONMENT. Maintain our international leadership role in protecting the 
  environment, and continue improving air and water quality at home alongside 
  effective conservation of our wildlife. 
  THE NATION. Maintain the unity of the United Kingdom and preserve the 
  stability of the Nation through an evolutionary - rather than revolutionary - 
  approach to constitutional change. 
  EUROPE. Seek a partnership of nation states in Europe, and not allow Britain 
  to be part of a federal European state. 
  THE POUND. Guarantee that Britain will not join a single currency in the next 
  parliament unless the British people give their express approval in a 
  referendum. 


 

