DEMOCRACY, FREEDOM, CULTURE AND IDENTITY.  BRITISH NATIONAL PARTY GENERAL ELECTION MANIFESTO 2010.  The Manifesto of the British National Party 6 May 2010. Published by the British National Party PO Box 14, Welshpool, SY21 0WE. ©2010 The British National Party All rights reserved
INTRODUCTION
The British National Party enters the 2010 general election with one of the most comprehensive and detailed manifestos in its history.
The BNP is proud to campaign on a number of issues which set it apart from all other political parties, namely the conflict in Afghanistan, the immigration invasion of our country, the threat to our security posed by Islamism and the danger of the European Union to our sovereignty.
The BNP is also the only party to map out realistic and sensible budget cuts which will bring the deficit under control -- without cutting front line public services to the British people.
In addition, the reader will find unique and innovative policies within this document which range from a solution for the housing crisis to restoring British industry, and from building our nation's IT infrastructure to constitutional reform to guarantee our people's liberties and freedom.
The word "democracy" appears in the title of our manifesto for good reason.
It represents our desire to preserve this great institution.
It is also a warning that democracy is under threat from the European Union and mass immigration, both of which threaten to extinguish all of our traditions and culture.
The word "freedom" appears in the title to alert readers to the fact that civil liberties and personal freedoms in modern Britain are under attack.
In the name of "fighting terrorism," the old-gang parties have introduced draconian laws which have usurped many of our traditional freedoms -- while the old-gang parties themselves are to blame for the threat of terrorism hanging over our country.
The word "security" appears in the title because the BNP believes in the sanctity of life, limb and property.
This means safe neighbourhoods with vibrant, cohesive communities; it means security of long-term employment, devoid of the fear that industry, commerce and employment will be transferred to the Third World.
The word "identity" appears in the title because the BNP believes in genuine ethnic and cultural diversity and the right of all peoples to be free of colonisation and rule by others -- including the indigenous people of these islands.
The BNP is committed to putting the interests of the British people first.
I invite you to review our policies and make your choice.  Yours sincerely,  Nick Griffin, MEP Chairman, British National Party.
BRITISH NATIONAL PARTY MANIFESTO 2010.  KEY PLEDGES.  DEFENDING BRITAIN: BNP DEFENCE POLICY. The BNP will end the involvement of British troops in the Afghanistan war.  
The BNP will not allow British forces to become involved in a war against Iran.
The BNP will withdraw our troops from Germany.
The BNP will renegotiate our presence in NATO.
The BNP will raise Defence spending by one percent over the rate of inflation  for the next five years.
The BNP will institute a Community Award Scheme for young people.  
IMMIGRATION: AN UNPARALLELED CRISIS WHICH ONLY THE BNP CAN SOLVE. At current immigration and birth rates, indigenous British people are set to become  a minority well within 50 years. 
This will result in the extinction of the British people, culture, heritage and identity.
The BNP will take all steps necessary to halt and reverse this process. 
These steps will include a halt to all further immigration, the deportation of all illegal immigrants, a halt to the "asylum" swindle and the promotion of the already existing voluntary repatriation scheme.
The BNP recognises the right of legally settled and law-abiding minorities to remain in the UK and enjoy the full protection of the law, on the understanding that the indigenous population of Britain has the right to remain the majority population of our nation.
The BNP will deport all foreigners convicted of crimes in Britain, regardless of their immigration status.
The BNP will review all citizenship grants awarded since Labour entered government in 1997, based on that party's admission that they orchestrated mass immigration to change forcibly Britain's demographics and to gerrymander elections.
The BNP will repeal the Race Relations Act and all other far leftist social  engineering projects, such as the Equalities and Human Rights Commission aimed  at enforcing multiculturalism.
The BNP will regain sovereign control of our borders by increasing funding  to the UK Border Agency.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND THE "CLIMATE CHANGE" THEORY.  The BNP demands an end to the destruction of Britain's green belt, caused primarily by housing demand fuelled through mass immigration.
The BNP will launch a "polluter pays" policy in the fight against environmental damage.
The BNP will encourage the use of existing "brown sites" for all new building  or industrial developments.
The BNP rejects the "climate change" theory which holds that all western nations  need to be stripped of their manufacturing base and pay untold billions to the Third  World to build up their industries.
LEAVING THE EUROPEAN UNION.  The BNP loves Europe but hates the EU.
The BNP demands an immediate withdrawal from the European Union, which is  an organisation dedicated to usurping British sovereignty and to destroying our  nationhood and national identity.
The BNP will end the annual multibillion cash haemorrhage Britain pays out to the EU  in membership fees and regulatory costs.
This money will be spent on building  infrastructure in Britain and alleviating poverty and unemployment at home.
COUNTER JIHAD: CONFRONTING THE ISLAMIC COLONISATION OF BRITAIN.  The BNP is implacably opposed to the Labour/Tory regime's mass immigration  policies which, if left unchecked, will see Britain and most of Europe colonised by  Islam within a few decades.
The BNP believes that the historical record shows that Islam is by its very nature  incompatible with modern secular western democracy.
The BNP will ban the burka, ritual slaughter and the building of further mosques  in Britain.
The BNP believes that there should be absolutely no further immigration from any  Muslim countries, as it presents one of the most deadly threats yet to the survival  of our nation.
We propose the immediate deportation of all radical Islamist preachers, those  proven to have attended any of their inflammatory sermons, and any other members  of their community who object to these reasonable security measures.
The BNP is the only party to identify correctly the twin causes of Islamist terrorism  in Britain: (a) mass immigration and (b) a biased British foreign policy which serves  to incite Muslims living in Britain.
RENATIONALISING THE WELFARE STATE.  The BNP will halt the handout of benefits, housing, education and pensions to  foreigners who have not paid into the system.
The BNP will ensure that the National Health Service is used to serve British people  and not used as an International Health Service.
The BNP will provide education and training for the unemployed to enable them to get  back into work.
The BNP will institute a workfare-not-welfare policy for those who refuse to get back  to work.
FREEDOM FOR ALL: THE RESTORATION OF OUR CIVIL LIBERTIES. The BNP will repeal all legislation enacted by successive Labour and Tory regimes  which have usurped the British people's basic civil liberties.
The BNP will circumvent the erosion of our liberties by the old gang parties under  the guise of "fighting terrorism" by dealing with the root causes of Islamist extremism  in Britain, namely mass immigration and Britain's biased foreign policy.
The BNP will repeal all laws aimed at restricting freedom of speech, including those  relating to race relations and religion.
The BNP rejects ID cards as an undesirable manifestation of the surveillance  society.
The BNP will repeal the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European  Convention on Human Rights, both of which are exploited to abuse Britain's  hospitality by the world's scroungers.
By withdrawing from the EU, the BNP will not permit British courts to be subservient  to international bodies or courts which override the law of the British parliament.
CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE: PROTECTING AND ENHANCING OUR HERITAGE.  The BNP will devolve all powers properly capable of exercise to local level and revived  county council government.
The BNP will create an English parliament in Westminster.
The BNP will create a pan-British parliament to oversee those policy areas  currently determined by Westminster and invite the Irish Republic to join  as an equal partner.
The BNP will reform the House of Lords to include non-party political experts and  individuals chosen on the grounds of talent and service.
The BNP will introduce citizens' initiative referenda to force government to adhere  to the will of the voters on specific subjects.
The BNP will introduce a new Bill of Rights which will guarantee certain basic civil  liberties.
The BNP will enact legislation forbidding interference in the electoral process by third  parties not partaking in an election.
The BNP will restrict the use of postal voting only to those incapable of getting to the  polling station on election day.
DEMOCRACY AND THE MEDIA. The BNP will enact legislation which will hold journalists and their media outlets  criminally liable for knowingly publishing falsehoods.
The BNP will create a media complaints body which will have the power to grant  slandered persons or institutions the right of reply with equal prominence plus financial  compensation in serious cases.
The BNP will cut waiting times and service difficulties by relieving the immigration  burden upon the NHS.
Education for a British Future.  The BNP will reverse the budget cuts on education and prioritise this sector as vital  to the rebuilding of our nation.
The BNP will bring back traditional syllabi and teaching methods to replace the current  and obviously failed systems currently being used.
The BNP will bring back streaming and grammar schools.
The BNP will bring back academic and sporting competition at all levels  of education.
The BNP will offer free university education to deserving students who have completed  their period of Community Service.
TRANSPORT: GETTING BRITAIN MOVING AGAIN.  The BNP will make rail travel affordable once again by reversing the disastrous  privatisation process which has grossly inflated ticket prices.
The BNP will reduce traffic congestion by bringing the immigration invasion  under control.
The BNP will invest in a high speed 200 mph magnetic levitation inter-city  rail network.
The BNP will seek to decrease the price of fuel which is already comprised of at least  63 percent government tax.
The BNP will charge foreign trucks for the right to use Britain's road network, as other  European nations already do.
The BNP will encourage and support the development of alternative transportation  technologies to ultimately replace the internal combustion engine.
AGRICULTURE: FOOD AND FISHERIES.  The BNP will promote British agriculture by gradually phasing out the EU's CAP  subsidies and replacing them with a viable UK system.
The BNP will forbid the development and importation of genetically modified produce.
The BNP will encourage the regeneration of the family farm as the core structure  of Britain's agricultural sector.
The BNP will investigate the need for a massive soil reinvigoration scheme.
The BNP will outlaw non-stunned ritual slaughter of animals.
The BNP will bring back our nation's traditional 200 mile coastal fishing exclusivity zone.
ENERGY: FUELLING THE NATION'S GROWTH.  The BNP is committed to research into renewable and quasi-renewable energy sources  and transmission systems, such as wave power, hydrogen fuel, and nuclear energy.
The BNP rejects the notion that our nation's nuclear power stations should be owned  by foreign investors.
The BNP opposes the punitive taxation mandated by the other parties' adherence to  the global warming theory and the "carbon credit" racket.
The BNP will stop the building of wind turbines which are inefficient and blight  the landscape.
The BNP will investigate clean-burning coal-fired power plants as another method of  dealing with increased energy demands.
FOREIGN POLICY: PUTTING BRITISH INTERESTS FIRST.  The BNP will realign British foreign policy to put our nation's interests first.
The BNP will undertake not to interfere with the sovereignty of any other nation, and  those in the Middle East in particular.
The BNP would only deploy British armed forces in a conflict in which Britain's  interests were directly involved.
The BNP will end the foreign aid swindle and reallocate the money saved to help  British people.
HOUSING: SHELTERING THE NATION.  The BNP will allow local authorities to borrow on the open market to provide housing  in their locality.
The BNP will abolish the Homes and Community and Regional Development agencies  and transfer regeneration and housing functions to local councils.
The BNP will place each local council under a legal duty to build a number of homes  set to a percentage of the waiting list total each year.
These would only be available to  British citizens.
The BNP will introduce a "local connection test" for any applicant seeking social  housing in terms of which they would need to demonstrate a positive and historical  link to the area.
The BNP will create a national infrastructure bank to promote regeneration and national  infrastructure renewal.
The BNP will relieve part of the housing crisis by halting and reversing the immigration  invasion.
THE ECONOMY: PUTTING BRITAIN BACK ON THE ROAD TO RECOVERY.  A BNP government would tackle the national debt problem by cutting expenditure on  all projects which do not serve British interests.
These expenditures which will be cut include the annual costs of £18 billion spent on "global warming," the £13 billion spent on immigration, the £4 billion spent on asylum, the £15 billion spent on EU membership, the £9.1 billion spent on foreign aid, the billions spent fighting illegal and immoral foreign wars, and the billions spent on "politically correct" social engineering projects.
The BNP undertakes not to reduce front-line public services while billions of pounds  continue to flow out of the country to foreign interests.
British people must benefit first  from British tax income.
The BNP aims to relieve the tax burden by raising the personal non-taxable allowance  to £12,500.
The BNP will encourage the family unit by reintroducing the married man's allowance  by as much as £2,500, depending upon the presence of children.
The BNP will raise the inheritance tax level to £1 million.
The BNP will work for a reduction in council tax through the slashing of all politically  correct council functions and "diversity" schemes.
The BNP would take some of these savings and invest them in rebuilding British  industry and skills through an active protectionist policy as many other European  nations already do.
The BNP will rebuild Britain's skills base -- lost through decades of deindustrialisation caused by successive Tory and Labour regimes -- by offering generous subsidies to students who study engineering and science and to institutions offering such education.
The BNP will ensure that globalist corporations pay their fair share of the tax burden.
We will close down the legal loopholes which allow tax evasion through Transfer  Pricing and the outsourcing of jobs to foreign nations.
The BNP will therefore introduce legislation to ensure that a foreign acquisition of any  significantly-sized British company is judged to be in the public and national interest  before it can proceed.
The BNP will pass legislation to separate utility (high street) banks from the investment  banking sector to prevent a repeat of the credit crisis.
The BNP will oppose the privatisation of natural monopolies such as Royal Mail.
Creating Local Economies.  The BNP would support local economies by creating a national network of autonomous  credit unions.
The BNP would investigate the viability of voluntary local currencies as a means of  assisting local economies.
PENSIONS: LOOKING AFTER OUR OLD PEOPLE.  The BNP aims to increase the state pension to £150 per week within the duration  of the first Parliament.
The BNP will link the state pension to earnings which will ensure that pensioner  incomes keep pace with the cost of living.
The BNP will reduce the current annual allowance for tax relief on pension contributions  from the present amount of approximately £230,000 to £75,000.
A solution to the public sector pensions crisis must be found through a national  conference with all the players -- employers and workers' representatives.
Part of the solution lies in raising the age of retirement to 68 over a period  of years.
The BNP will enact legislation to ensure that pensions are eligible only to Britons and  those who have fully paid into the system.
The BNP will vigorously oppose the UK taxpayer being called upon to subsidise any  pension underfunding crisis elsewhere in the EU.
IT AND THE DIGITAL REVOLUTION: THE BNP'S VISION.  The BNP will reinvigorate the IT sector in Britain with massive investments in  technology universities.
The BNP will institute a policy of protectionism for the local IT industry and jobs.
The BNP will nationalise the telecoms infrastructure to enable the creation of a  not-for-profit 100Mbps broadband service across the country.
The BNP will invest in technology universities to provide the skills to our people to  take their rightful place as world leaders in the IT industry.

DEFENDING BRITAIN: BNP DEFENCE POLICY.  The BNP will end the involvement of British troops in the Afghanistan war.
The BNP will not allow British forces to become involved in a war against Iran.
The BNP will withdraw our troops from Germany.
The BNP will renegotiate our presence in NATO.
The BNP will raise defence spending by one percent over the rate of inflation for the  next five years.
The BNP will institute a Community Award Scheme for young people
The British Army Must be Used to Defend Britain.  The purpose of Britain's armed forces is to protect British interests at home and abroad - and nothing else.
During the recent Iraq War, which the BNP opposed, there were no strategic or commercial interests to defend nor were British citizens threatened.
The same applies to the current war in Afghanistan.
This war, according to some estimates, may continue for another 30 years, producing a death toll of British servicemen that will far exceed the worst years of the troubles in Northern Ireland.
It is because we have no interests to defend in Afghanistan that our party demands an immediate withdrawal of our troops from that theatre.
In addition, the BNP firmly opposes the threatened war against Iran.
That nation also presents no credible threat to Britain, and we are deeply suspicious of allegations of "weapons of mass destruction" emanating from the same neo-con clique who lied about Iraq's alleged atom bomb and WMDs.
The Tory/Labour Degradation of Our Armed Forces.  Twice during the 20th century, the UK came close to the brink of destruction because of the neglect of our defences.
The present weakness of our armed forces is due to a process that has been ongoing for years and the Conservative record is only marginally less appalling than that of Labour.
Both parties have undermined and abolished our historic regiments.
Independence of Action and the Rejection of "Collective Security".  There is far too much emphasis on collective security, embracing nations that are not always well disposed to our viewpoint.
The opposition from many of our EU allies to our campaign in the Falklands provides a sober example, with the French happily supplying the Argentinians with Exocet missiles.
The integration of our forces with those of other nations, as envisaged by the EU, is dangerous and will cause us to have neither the means nor the freedom to act in defence of our national interests should the need arise.
Commitment to a British Supplied Military and Nuclear Deterrent.  The BNP aims to have an independent British military, equipped by British factories in all the essential needs of modern warfare.
Our independent force must include an independent nuclear deterrent and capability.
These weapons would remain under British control.
We believe in the strengthening of the British navy, which has been downsized in recent decades.
This will be of significance once we regain control of our 200-mile fishing zone.
The UK requires a capability to mobilise units and dispatch them in defence of British interests worldwide.
This will entail the development of new aircraft carriers, new transport aircraft and helicopters.
Britain must be prepared to launch limited operations where it is necessary to protect our citizens abroad and not be deterred by `world opinion'.
The Falklands campaign was an obvious example where Britain needed to act, but more recently there were clear grounds to rescue people of British descent from the murderous regime in Zimbabwe.
We shall restore many of the historic regiments, particularly those from Scotland, which were disbanded by the Labour government.
We shall also carry out an appraisal of the bureaucracy within the Defence Ministry.
Withdraw from Germany and Renegotiate Our Status in NATO.  We shall recall our troops from Germany, where we see little purpose in their continuing presence.
The Cold War has long since passed and our troop presence in Germany is superfluous and little more than an insult to the Germans.
We shall renegotiate our presence in NATO to ensure that we maintain independence and neutrality.
Raise Defence Spending: Equipping Our Troops.  We will raise spending on defence by one percent over the rate of inflation for the next five years so that our forces may never again be committed to any conflict short of equipment or kit, as has been the case with the shameful deployment in the Tory/ Labour war in Afghanistan.
This increase in spending will be even more significant when it is borne in mind that under a BNP government, British forces will not be involved in wars in Afghanistan, Iraq or Iran.
Community Award Scheme Will Encourage Social Values and Work Ethics.  We will introduce a Community Award Scheme for our young people which will take the form of a compulsory one year period for all school leavers during which they will work in the community as the final element of their education.
This scheme will allow young people to choose between a variety of community service options which might include, for example, caring for the elderly or disabled people, environmental or heritage restoration projects or military training.
The final choice of direction in this regard will be dictated by the school leaver's scholastic record, preferences and suitability.
These courses would be character building and would instil discipline, social and community values and work ethics in all young people.
Service in this scheme would entitle each individual to receive something back from the society to which they have learnt to contribute, such as free university education, a properly supported apprenticeship or business training.
Immigration: An Unparalleled Crisis Which Only the BNP Can Solve.  At current immigration and birth rates, indigenous British people are set to become  a minority well within 50 years.
This will result in the extinction of the British people,  culture, heritage and identity.
The BNP will take all steps necessary to halt and reverse this process.
These steps will include a halt to all further immigration, the deportation of all illegal immigrants, a halt to the "asylum" swindle and the promotion of the already existing voluntary repatriation scheme.
The BNP recognises the right of legally settled and law-abiding minorities to remain in  the UK and enjoy the full protection of the law, on the understanding that the indigenous  population of Britain has the right to remain the majority population of our nation.
The BNP will deport all foreigners convicted of crimes in Britain, regardless of their  immigration status.
The BNP will review all citizenship grants awarded since Labour entered government  in 1997, based on that party's admission that they orchestrated mass immigration to  forcibly change Britain's demographics and to gerrymander elections.
The BNP will repeal the Race Relations Act and all other far leftist social engineering  projects, such as the Equalities and Human Rights Commission aimed at enforcing  multiculturalism.
The BNP will regain sovereign control of our borders by increasing funding to the  UK Border Agency.
The Scale of the Crisis.  Britain's existence is in grave peril, threatened by immigration and multiculturalism.
In the absence of urgent action, we, the indigenous British people, will be reduced to minority status in our own ancestral homeland within two generations.
We, alone of all the political parties, have a decades-long record of truthfully articulating our concerns, often with foresight, and long before many of the problems associated with multiculturalism entered the public consciousness.
British People Set to be a Minority within 30-50 Years: The Official Figures.  According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), legal Third World immigrants made up 14.7 percent (7.5 million) of the population of England in 2004 ("Population review of 2004 and 2005: England and Wales", Karen Gask, Office for National Statistics).
According to the ONS, 10.9 percent (or 6.7 million) of the currently resident population of Britain was not born in this country ("One in 10 of population born abroad", Telegraph, 09 Dec 2009).
In 2005, the ONS issued a separate report which said that 36 percent of all births in England and Wales were not "white British" ("Birthweight and gestational age by ethnic group, England and Wales 2005: introducing new data on births", Kath Moser, Office for National Statistics).
This 2005 birth rate figure does not include births to second and third generation immigrant mothers.
Figures released by the ONS in January 2009 revealed that the Muslim population in Britain has grown by more than 500,000 to 2.4 million in just four years.
Their population multiplied 10 times faster than the rest of society ("Muslim population `rising 10 times faster than rest of society'", the Times, 30 January 2009).
An August 2008 ONS population report stated that, on average, `foreign' women have 2.5 children each, rising to 3.9 for those from Bangladesh and Almost five for Pakistani women ("Most children of British mothers born out of wedlock", Telegraph, 11 July 2008).
When these figures are added in, the immigrant birth rate is estimated to be around 50 percent of all live births in England and Wales.
The majority of the `new immigrants' are not from Eastern Europe, as is often widely claimed.
According to the ONS figures, immigrants from Eastern Europe had 25,000 children in Britain last year -an absolute minority of the just over 700,000 live births ("Number of foreigners in UK hits record 6.7m", BBC, 8 December 2009).
According to the Birmingham City Council, 61 percent of all primary school children in greater Birmingham are of Third World origin ("Asian pupils outnumber white children in Birmingham primary schools for the first time", Birmingham Mail, 26 Jan 2010).
Over 300 languages are currently spoken in London schools.
Some of the most established of these are Bengali, Gujarati, Punjabi, Cantonese, Mandarin and Hokkien ("Languages across Europe", BBC).
Some 150 languages are spoken in schools in Reading, an indication of the extent of the invasion in Berkshire ("150 different languages spoken in Reading schools", Reading Post, 8 February 2010).
All these statistics taken together show that the non-British ethnic population is increasing in number exponentially, and given current immigration and birth rates, will utterly overwhelm the indigenous population of Britain well within the next 50 years, and more likely within 30 years.
The Disastrous Effect of Mass Immigration on British Society
There is no escaping the fact that the admission into this country of large numbers of foreigners has, inter alia, created a poorer, more violent, uncertain, disorientated, confused, politically correct, ill-educated, dependent, fractured society.
We do not share the Orwellian knee-jerk response familiar to the opinion formers within the BBC and elsewhere that it is `racist' to discuss immigration and population density.
The word `racist', which is of loose definition, was invented by the arch Marxist Leon Trotsky in order to suppress any debate on this important subject.
Because of this, the ongoing arrival into the UK of between 300,000­500,000 Third World immigrants each year is an issue that all three of the old gang parties have refused to discuss.
There are many difficulties typical within multicultural societies.
Quite apart from the enormous costs (estimated at £13 billion per year), problems in Britain include social breakdown, the deterioration of community spirit and neighbourliness, the erosion of our Christian heritage, the dilution of our history and culture, the promulgation of totalitarian legislation alien to these islands, congestion on roads and railways, the erosion of the countryside, pressures on social services, and so on.
A Case Study: Crime and Immigration
Immigration has had a dramatic effect on Britain's rising crime rate.
According to official figures, over 77 percent of adult black males between the ages of 18 and 35 are on the police's DNA database ("Debate on DNA database continues to rage", Computing.co.uk, 12 January 2010).
A person's DNA is only added to that database when in police custody for a recordable offence.
According to official figures, black people accounted for at least 15 percent of the sentenced population in prison, 13 percent of the remand population and 21 percent of fine defaulters.
The ethnic grouping of the female British prison population follows roughly similar proportions ("UK Numbers by Crime", Economic and Social Research Council, 2009, and "Prison population of British nationals: by ethnic group: Social Trends 34", Office for National Statistics).
According to official figures, Muslims account for 12 percent of the prison population and an even higher proportion in high security jails ("Growing fears over Muslim prison `gangs'", BBC, 12 March 2010).
Black people, who according to government statistics make up 2 percent of the population, are the principal suspects in 11.7 percent of homicides ("Statistics on Race and the Criminal Justice System", UK Home Office, 2004).
A study has confirmed that whites are overwhelmingly the victims of racially motivated crime, and not the perpetrators, as often portrayed by the controlled media.
The study, titled "Interracial Violence", produced by well known researcher Tony Shell, has shown that white victims of racist murders are over-represented by a factor of 32 for the time period 2004 to 2007.
UK figures for unemployment, as well as welfare dependency, educational failure, and other social pathologies tell a similar story, each disproportionately involving ethnic groups.
Immigration Has Harmed British Jobs The concept of "British jobs for British workers" has been terminally undermined by employment figures released by the Office for National Statistics which show that within the private sector, there were 288,000 fewer Britons working in the third quarter of 2009, compared to 1997.
If those working beyond pension age are removed from the equation, then it transpires that there are currently 637,000 fewer Britons working than in 1997.
Overall, immigrants have taken up more than 1.64 million of the 1.67 million jobs created since 1997.
The Labour Party Deliberately Engineered Mass Immigration Recent revelations from Labour Party officials have confirmed what we always knew: that immigration has been deceitfully and deliberately employed to dilute British identity and to gerrymander the UK electoral system.
Former Labour advisor Andrew Neather admitted that the social objective of Labour's immigration policy was to "rub the Right's nose in diversity and render their arguments out of date." Labour's deliberate policy of undermining British identity in this manner forms the rationale behind the BNP's plan to implement an urgent review of all citizenship grants made since 1997.
The BNP will ensure that the honour and benefit of British citizenship has gone to people who are contributing to society.
Those who have been brought in under false pretences by Labour and who are a burden on Britain and British society will be politely but firmly shown the door.
THE BNP'S PROGRAMME TO SAVE BRITAIN.   As trustees for future generations, it is our task to ensure that we do not become a dispossessed minority in our own homeland.
It is our responsibility to past and future generations of Britons to ensure that we retain our culture and identity.
The BNP's programme to save the British people is as follows:
1. Declare Britain a Non-Immigration Country.  Britain is already the most densely populated nation in Europe and a BNP government would officially declare it to be a non-immigration country.
Work permits will only be issued in exceptional circumstances, for example, when the Government determines there is a need to rebuild British industry or when there is a genuine shortage of skills.
We shall permit genuine students, so long as they possess health insurance.
This latter concession will also assist with our long-term policy of re-building Third World economies in order to facilitate the voluntary return of their nationals or descendants, under our long-term resettlement programme.
2. Deport all illegal immigrants.  We shall deport all illegal immigrants and bogus asylum seekers, including their dependents.
We note that even under the current unacceptably lax deportation policies, thousands of people are deported from the UK annually without incident.
It is estimated that there are well in excess of one million illegal immigrants in Britain today.
Illegal immigration must be considered to be an aspect of national security, not merely an issue of social policy.
Arrests of Islamic terrorists in Britain, plotting mass murder, and second-generation `Britons' engaged in the 2005 bombing campaign illustrate the link between illegal immigration and terrorism.
The link between illegal immigration and crime in our communities -including the ruthless exploitation of the immigrants themselves -is also well documented.
3. Halt the "Asylum" Swindle.  We recognise (under the UN Convention on Refugees) the existence of legitimate international refugees from persecution and war.
This convention provides that such persons must seek refuge in the nearest safe country bordering the one they are fleeing.
We consider that such refugees are, for the most part, the responsibility of the nations within the global region concerned.
An `asylum seeker' who has crossed dozens of safe countries to reach soft-touch Britain has lost the claim of asylum once they move out of that first safe country.
Because every `asylum seeker' in Britain has crossed dozens of safe countries to enter the UK, the BNP's attitude is that there are currently no legal asylum seekers in Britain today.
It must be stated that the problems of the world are neither Britain's fault nor our responsibility -nor do they fall within our capacity to solve.
We shall ensure, in the context of illegal immigrants and bogus asylum seekers, that there are no amnesties to reward law-breakers and no extensive appeal against legal decisions.
The BNP is convinced that once the benefits system for these bogus asylum seekers is removed, the flood of applicants will halt by itself.
4. Encourage Voluntary Resettlement.  The BNP will introduce a system of voluntary resettlement whereby immigrants and their descendants are afforded the opportunity to return to their lands of ethnic origin, assisted by generous financial incentives both for individuals and for the countries in question.
We note that the 1971 Immigration Act introduced the measure of voluntary repatriation but the relevant section of the Act has been deliberately disguised and underused by successive governments.
We shall employ the UK's current foreign aid budget to finance the resettlement programme and provide such additional funding as we deem necessary.
5. The Recognition of the Rights of Settled and Law-Abiding Minorities.  We shall recognise the right of law-abiding minorities to remain in the UK and enjoy the full protection of the law.
We shall also emphasise the importance of the prior status of the indigenous people.
There will be a national extension of the `Sons and Daughters' policy in terms of priority for housing and school places, which BNP councils will seek to implement at local level.
6. Fund the Border Protection Services.  We shall regain sovereign control of our borders by raising the funding of existing border controls.
This will allow for an expansion in infrastructure and an increase in personnel which will secure our borders against intrusion.
7. Permanent Bans for Immigration Law Violators.  We shall impose a permanent lifetime ban on re-entry into Britain, enforced by instant deportation, for anyone found guilty of having violated British immigration laws.
8. Deportation of all Foreign Criminals.  We shall deport all criminal entrants, regardless of their residential status.
This includes the deportation of all Muslim extremists, regardless of their length of residence in the UK or citizenship.
9. The Abolition of all Leftist Social Engineering Projects.  The BNP will repeal and abolish the following leftist social engineering projects which lie at the heart of the failed multicultural experiment which has brought Britain to the edge of disaster: We shall repeal the Race Relations Act and all other artificial restrictions on free speech or employment.
We shall abolish all targets and quotas for ethnic representation in all areas of employment, public and private.
We shall abolish politically correct indoctrination of the police, teachers, and employees in the public sector.
We shall abolish government-sponsored ethnicity-specific professional bodies, housing associations and other organisations.
We shall abolish all departments, agencies or other agencies of government whose sole and specific function is to attend to the interests of ethnic minorities.
The law shall be enforced equally, free of politicisation in respect of ethnic origin.
We shall legislate to ensure the only languages permitted in local and national governmental documents and papers will be English, Welsh, Cornish, Manx and Gaelic, where applicable.
The employment of native languages on the part of ethnic minorities in their own homes, schools and institutions will be encouraged.
A Clause 28-style proscription against the promotion of racial integration in schools and the media will be introduced.
We shall abolish `positive discrimination' schemes that have made native Britons second-class citizens.
Abolishing Multiculturalism and Preserving Britain.  The present regime and its collaborators are engaged in an undeclared cultural war against the British people and have employed Orwellian methods of intellectual terrorism to suppress opposition.
In pursuit of Labour's globalist ideals, the white working class has been abandoned, replaced and displaced by a new ethnic electoral power base.
We believe that the ability to create and sustain social and political structures in which individual freedom, equality before the law, private property and popular participation in decision-making are features, is an expression of innate genetic nature.
It follows that the demographic changes being wrought in our islands will create adverse affects upon our traditional democracy and the institutions that support it.
To preserve the continued existence of our traditional democracy, we must therefore take the necessary measures to safeguard the existence of the native peoples of these islands and ensure they are the dominant ethnic, cultural and political group.
In this context we refer to the English, Scots, Irish and Welsh along with the limited numbers of peoples of European descent, who have arrived centuries or decades ago and who have fully integrated into our society.
Multiculturalism: The Wrecker of Nationhood.  We know of no great civilisation that was created or sustained by a multicultural population.
Indeed, many have collapsed because they became multicultural, with Rome and Ancient Egypt being well known examples of this process.
The experience of recent history has demonstrated that multicultural societies become fractured and balkanised, losing their unity and purpose.
The Balkans, Rwanda, Indonesia, Ulster, Fiji, Sri Lanka and Iraq are all examples of such societies.
Group identity, belonging, loyalty and allegiance, in other words, are not products of `false consciousness', economics, imperialism or sociological processes; they are an essential part of elementary human nature.
British people may take pride from knowing that the blood of a magnificent heritage of nation-building, civilisation-creating heroes and heroines runs through their veins.
Being British is more than merely possessing a modern document known as a passport.
It runs far deeper than that: it is to belong to a special chain of unique people who have the natural law right to remain a majority in their ancestral homeland.
Environmental Protection and the "Climate Change" Theory.  The BNP demands an end to the destruction of Britain's green belt, caused primarily  by housing demand fuelled through mass immigration.
The BNP will launch a "polluter pays" policy in the fight against environmental  damage.
The BNP will encourage the use of existing "brown sites" for all new building or  industrial developments.
The BNP rejects the "climate change" theory which holds that all western nations  need to be stripped of their manufacturing base and pay untold billions to the  Third World to build up their industries.
The Environment: Threatened by Mass Immigration.  Our `green and pleasant land' is rapidly disappearing as Britain has become one of the most densely populated countries in the world.
Mass immigration has fuelled this overpopulation.
Official estimates predict that, if left unchecked, immigration into Britain will require a city the size of Birmingham to be built every five years and result in a total population of 90 million people by 2050.
Already, immigration accounts for 40 percent of all new households established in Britain.
More people equal more roads, services, utilities, travel, noise, congestion and pollution.
The Optimum Population Trust has suggested that Britain is best suited to a population of 30 million people.
Other forecasts suggest the population will shortly reach 70 million -due entirely to the demographic changes wrought by establishment politicians.
The BNP: The Only True Green Party.  The BNP's Key Environment Policies Are: 1. End Immigration to Relieve Pressure on Our Green Belts.  The BNP will relieve the unbearable pressure on our green belts by ending immigration.
This will, at one blow, remove the need for an extra four million homes in the green belts of England in particular.
2. Institute Strict Anti-Pollution Measures to Halt Environmental Damage The BNP will implement a number of strict measures to halt all environmental damage caused by pollution.
These measures will include:  The creation of a "polluter pays" policy to punish transgressors.
The creation of Environmental Courts with powers to investigate and prosecute  fly-tippers, bush meat importers and commercial and industrial polluters.
The cessation of all new intrusions into the green belt, except in special instances of  genuine local need.
Supporting inner city and suburban infill development to supply the needs for new  housing and commercial space.
Our ideal is a clean, attractive country, free of pollution in all its forms, including -- where feasible -- those of noise, light and congestion.
The Restoration of Aesthetic Standards to Our Architectural Heritage. The BNP will work to do away with the stark modernism of 1960s-style socialist architecture which currently blights our towns and cities.
This socialist "blockhouse" mentality and style will be replaced with a blend of aesthetically pleasing, traditional styles, made whenever possible out of local materials to retain the individual character of reach region.
To this end, we shall ensure that the traditional crafts and trades required to preserve the building styles characteristic of the UK receive the financial assistance of the Government.
Thatchers, dry wall stone builders, masons, carpenters, and others will be promoted.
The Global Warming Theory.  For several years, the BNP was the only party to express serious doubts over the claims of `global warming'.
The deluge of recent revelations over the fraud, deception and distortion used in promoting this theory has undermined public confidence in the concept and has proven the BNP's original scepticism correct.
Climate has always changed but this process has been both natural and cyclical.
In Roman times, vines were grown as far north as Hadrian's Wall and olives were cultivated elsewhere in England.
Most of the underlying tenets of the global warming theory -including the `hockey stick' graph and global temperature rises -have been shown to be either completely fraudulent or grossly exaggerated.
Those who recall the 1970s scare of `global cooling' will know that these manias grip the media and easily-swayed politicians from time to time.
The sinister aspect of the global warming theory is however that for the first time the currently ruling elite seek to punish the British public financially directly through increased taxes to give to the Third World as "compensation" for this hoax; and to de-industrialise Britain through the imposition of impossible environmental targets.
Billions of pounds have already been added to taxpayers' utility bills -a scandal which last winter saw the death of up to 40,000 elderly due to hypothermia because of the levy on fuel, which has rendered household heating unaffordable.
The end result of the `global warming' theory is that the West will be de-industrialised and taxed to provide even more "aid" to the Third World and to build up the industries of China and India in particular.
This will have a disastrous effect on what is left of the British economy and manufacturing industry.
The BNP is the only party to question the global warming theory and to argue in favour of a reasonable, calm and rational approach to environmental care.
Leaving the European Union.  The BNP loves Europe but hates the EU.
The BNP demands an immediate withdrawal from the European Union, which  is an organisation dedicated to usurping British sovereignty and to destroying our  nationhood and national identity.
The BNP will end the annual multibillion cash haemorrhage Britain pays out for  EU in membership fees and regulatory costs.
This money will be spent on building  infrastructure in Britain and alleviating poverty and unemployment at home.
The EU: An Orwellian Super-State.  The European Union is an Orwellian super-state in formation.
By degrees, it is depriving our people of their inherited right to determine their affairs in their own traditional and democratically elected Parliament.
In our Parliament's stead is an unelected Commission, which initiates new laws behind closed doors and whose long-term ambitions embrace the extirpation of Britain as an identifiable nation.
To facilitate the destruction of the nation states of Europe, including Britain, demographic change is being wrought, designed to strip indigenous peoples of their culture, heritage, history and traditions.
In other words, multiculturalism is designed to balkanise the population, thereby undermining the integrity of the nation state and facilitating EU governance.
The federal European project is incompatible with our deep-rooted national, traditional and personal freedoms and hard-won democracy and sovereignty.
British Law Has Been Usurped.  The EU has compromised the principle that no Westminster parliament may bind its successors.
Trial by jury, the presumption of innocence, habeas corpus, and the ability to hire and fire our elected representatives are constitutional safeguards, presently in grave jeopardy, which we shall only protect and restore when we secede from the EU.
Europol has recently been furnished with alarming powers to investigate citizens for offences not deemed crimes in the UK.
The EU Arrest Warrant also provides Europol with the power to extradite UK citizens to member nations of the EU where the British legal safeguards mentioned above are not recognised.
75 Percent of Laws Now Made in the EU.  Today, 75 percent of our laws are made in the EU and over 120,000 directives and regulations are in force in Britain.
The EU believes that more legislation means more European union.
By contrast, the Conservative government, which signed the Treaty of Rome in 1973, informed us that there was no question of the UK losing "any essential sovereignty." Cabinet minutes of the times, available at the Public Record Office in Kew, display the deceit, conspiracy and treachery that was much in evidence when the Conservative administration joined us to the then Common Market.
This deceit continues, with politicians keen to disguise the true circumstances of their own impotence at Westminster.
The governing party at Westminster is so restricted by EU rules and regulations that there is hardly an area of policy where the British parliament remains entirely sovereign.
Immigration, the economy, public services, trade, overseas aid, energy, finance, employment, tax, agriculture and fisheries are all examples of areas affected by membership of the EU.
Even post office closures and bin collections are determined by the EU.
Any vote for the old-gang parties is a wasted vote; these parties are, in effect, collaborating agencies of the EU.
The Cost of EU Membership.  The tidal wave of petty legislation and regulation from the EU that is inflicted upon business, especially Small and Medium Enterprises (SME), suffocates enterprise and commercial activity.
The independent think tank, Open Europe, recently put the cost of EU regulation since 1998 at £4912 per UK household.
These costs are in addition to our membership fees of a little short of £15bn per annum, of which the net contribution is approximately £6.5bn and will, next year, rise to over £10bn, given Labour's surrender of our rebate.
Of the balance repatriated back to the UK, this may only be spent in such manner as the EU determines and much of it is wasted on pointless projects.
In Eastern Europe, meanwhile, vast infrastructure schemes are being financed at the expense of the British taxpayer whilst our pensioners go without.
International Trade Outside of the EU.  Currently, Britain's trade agreements are vetted and regulated by the EU.
Once it is free of the EU and is an independent nation again, Britain would determine its trading arrangements by itself.
The suggestion that membership of the EU is necessary for our prosperity is nonsense.
Switzerland and Norway enjoy higher standards of prosperity than Britain but remain outside the EU.
Britain would be free to negotiate trade agreements which are exclusively in its favour, in exactly the same way that Norway, Switzerland and the USA do.
By conducting our own trading agreements, particularly with the old Commonwealth nations, such as Australia, New Zealand and Canada, we will be in a position to scrap EU imposed quotas and tariffs on agricultural goods.
The cost of these restrictions to the family food bill is as much as £1,000 per annum.
Turkey: The EU's Final Solution against all European Nations.  It cannot be overlooked that Turkey has applied to join the EU and is supported in this endeavour by the Conservative Party, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats.
At a stroke, such a move would increase the EU's Muslim population by more than 75 million -and grant them total freedom of movement with its borders.
To exacerbate matters, Turkey has just relaxed visa restrictions on many Middle Eastern nations.
EU membership would therefore open the door to mass immigration from all of the Middle East and would confirm the end of Europe's ancient and historic identification with Christendom.
Counter Jihad: Confronting the Islamic Colonisation of Britain.  The BNP is implacably opposed to the Labour/Tory regime's mass immigration  policies which, if left unchecked, will see Britain and most of Europe colonised by  Islam within a few decades.
The BNP believes that the historical record shows that Islam is by its very nature  incompatible with modern secular western democracy.
The BNP will ban the burka, ritual slaughter and the building of further mosques  in Britain.
The BNP believes that there should be absolutely no further immigration from any  Muslim countries, as it presents one of the most deadly threats yet to the survival  of our nation.
We propose the immediate deportation of all radical Islamist preachers, those  proven to have attended any of their inflammatory sermons, and any other members  of their community who object to these reasonable security measures.
The BNP demands that Islamic immigration be halted and reversed as it presents  one of the most deadly threats yet to the survival of our nation.
The BNP is the only party to identify correctly the twin causes of Islamist terrorism  in Britain: (a) mass immigration and (b) a biased British foreign policy which serves  to incite Muslims living in Britain.
Islam: Incompatible with Western Democracy.  The historical record shows that Islam has, since its formation, been waging an almost constant war against Europe, impelled by its Qur'anic verses to convert all peoples of the earth to its belief system.
Created in conflict, every advance that Islam has made in the Middle and Near East, in Africa, and its attempts to invade Europe through Spain, the Balkans, and Italy, has been under the threat of the scimitar, the cannon, and murderous atrocities.
Today Europe faces a renewed Muslim invasion.
This time the weapons are no longer the steel blade or cannon: they are the passport, the visa stamp, corrupt liberal Western regimes who have allowed mass Third World immigration, and the baby's crib.
These things are the new weapons by which Islam now seeks to conquer Europe and the West, having failed in earlier centuries to conquer Europeans by force.
The Demographic Facts.  In 1900, Western Europe as a whole had just fifty thousand or so resident Muslims, almost all of them living in France.
In 1970, the figure was around three or four million in Western Europe.
In 2008, this figure was estimated to be in the region of 20 million -in Western Europe alone, and growing rapidly.
Europe as a whole, from Ireland to the Carpathians, presently has about 29 million Muslims (and will have 75 million more if Turkey is added to the European Union, as seems increasingly likely).
There are plans to build Europe's largest mosque, capable of seating 40,000 worshippers, in London.
Muslim populations have a higher birth rate than that of Europeans.
In Britain, the Muslim population is increasing ten times faster than any other segment of the population.
Increased immigration is set to boost the Muslim population even further, with conservative estimates pointing out that a combination of natural reproduction rates combined with falling European birth rates and increased immigration, will mean that many Western European nations will have Muslim populations of between 25 and 40 percent by 2035.
The extent of the Islamic colonisation of Britain has been underlined with the news that the Muslim vote will be "pivotal" in 82 constituencies in the forthcoming general election.
According to a press release issued by the Muslim Public Affairs Committee (MPACUK), one of a myriad of front organisations dedicated to colonising Britain with the aid of the Tory/Labour immigration policy, the 82 constituencies have a Muslim population larger than the incumbent MPs' majority.
As a result, the Muslims are organising through the network of at least 1,600 formal mosques which already exist in Britain.
The Five Characteristics of Islam in European Nations.  1. The first characteristic is a rise in anti-Semitism.
This is driven by the clash between  Zionism, which supports the state of Israel, created at the expense of the largely  Muslim Palestinian population, and the Muslim Arab states.
As Muslim populations  increase, so does a violent anti-Zionism, which very often crosses over into  anti-Semitism.
2. The second characteristic is the appearance of Islamic extremism amongst many first, second or even third generation Muslim immigrants.
This extremism has as its  primary root the traditional Islamic call to spread its religious worldview to all people,  by force if necessary.
Other factors driving Islamic extremism include an understanding of the pro-Israeli policies of most European nations, which in itself is seen as "anti-Palestinian" and therefore anti-Muslim; and then also the involvement of many European nations in blatantly illegal and immoral wars in Muslim parts of the world, such as Iraq, which have been "justified" on the basis of patently transparent lies.
3. The third characteristic of Muslim immigrant populations in European nations, which sets them apart from almost all other previous historical immigrant populations, is their refusal to take on the native culture, and instead import their originating culture as part of a colonisation process.
In this way, the dress (burkas, prayer coats, etc.), social behaviour (ritual animal sacrifice, religious practices which intrude, dominate, and drive away indigenous cultural practices -see mosque prayer calls in the traditionally British Christian city of Oxford as a primary example), arranged marriages, and many other Islamic cultural attributes are maintained, taught, and encouraged, while indigenous culture is deliberately suppressed.
Examples are legion: Muslim medical students in Britain have refused to wash their arms (standard practice for all medical procedures) because it would mean revealing parts of their bodies which they're forbidden to show to strangers according to Islamic law.
There are already 37 Muslim faith schools in London, and more are planned, all in a deliberate attempt to ensure that Islamic culture remains untouched by Western secularism.
4. The fourth characteristic of Islamic immigrant populations is large scale social  unrest.
This takes the form of violent street riots, as have happened almost everywhere  in Europe, but most noticeably in Paris and other French cities in recent years.
It also takes the form of social exclusion at schools: Muslim students perform less well than non-Muslim students.
In inner London, 37 percent of 16to 24-year-old Muslims have no qualifications.
When it comes to university education the picture is equally gloomy: Muslims are half as likely to have degree level or above qualifications than other inner London young people.
5. The fifth characteristic of immigrant Muslim populations in all nations has been their  widespread support for terrorism.
A survey of Muslim opinion in Britain, undertaken by NOP Research in 2006, revealed attitudes which have been shown to be common to all Muslim immigrant populations: Forty five percent of Muslims in Britain say that the World Trade Centre attacks of 11 September 2001 were a conspiracy by the American and Israeli governments.
This figure is more than twice as high as those who say it was not a conspiracy.
A quarter of all British Muslims believe that the London underground bombings of July 2005 were justified because of British support for the US led "war on terror." When asked, "Is Britain my country or their country?", 75 percent said that it was not their country.
Thirty percent of British Muslims would prefer to live under Sharia (Islamic religious) law than under British law.
According to the report, "Half of those who express a preference for living under Sharia law say that, given the choice, they would move to a country governed by those laws." Twenty eight percent hope for the UK one day to become a fundamentalist Islamic state.
One-third of Muslims in Britain believe that Western society is decadent and immoral and that Muslims should seek to end it.
Seventy eight percent support punishment for the people who publish cartoons featuring the prophet Muhammad.
Sixty eight percent support the arrest and prosecution of British people who "insult Islam." When asked if free speech should be protected, even if it offends religious groups, 62 percent of British Muslims chose the "no, it should not" answer.
"Hardcore Islamists" constitute 9 percent of the Muslim population in Britain.
Twenty nine percent class themselves as "staunch defenders of Islam." Individuals in this group aggressively defend their religion from internal and external threats, real or imagined.
The Muslim Sex Grooming Scandal.  Other problems of a more serious nature have also emerged: in Britain, the practice of "grooming" -where young white females are lured in sex abuse traps by Muslim males has now been officially recognised as a real issue.
The Times commented in an article on 11 August 2007, while reporting on the trial of two Muslim men convicted for the crime, that "The trial came amid growing concern at the attitudes of some Asian men towards white girls which campaigners for women claim few people wish to address.
Parents have complained that in parts of the country with large Asian communities white girls as young as 12 are being targeted for sex by older Asian men yet the authorities are unwilling to act because of fears of being labelled racist.
Although campaigners claim that hundreds of young girls are already being passed around men within the Asian community for sex...attempts to raise the problem with community leaders had met with little success, with most of them being in a state of denial about it" ("Grooming of white girls for sex is exposed as two Asian men jailed", Times, 11 August 2007).
The Real Threat of Islamist Terrorism.  Before the London train bombings (carried out by first and second generation Muslim immigrants living in Britain), intelligence services estimated that one percent of Muslims in Britain either supported or were involved in terrorism.
British intelligence services believe that, in recent years, 3,000 Muslims in Britain have been to al Qaeda training camps.
Intelligence experts estimate that there are at least 1,200 Muslim radicals (80 percent of Pakistani origin) in Britain who have terrorist intentions.
According to a report by the Home Office, 92 percent of all convicted terrorists in Britain are Muslim ("Statistics on Terrorism Arrests and Outcomes Great Britain", Home Office, 26 November 2009).
According to this report, there have been 1,661 terrorism arrests in Britain since 11 September 2001.
This translates to 1,528 Islamist terrorists being convicted in the nine and a half years since 2001.
Put another way, this means that a Muslim terrorist has been locked up at the rate of one every two days since 2001.
Only a fool or a madman would deny the very real threat this poses to the stability of Britain or that it really is just some "fringe" minority.
It is a serious, deadly threat which has already taken lives in the most severe acts of terrorism in the history of our nation.
The BNP's Solution to the New Jihad.  Radical Islam does not have multiculturalism or assimilation as its goal.
Rather, it seeks total Islamic domination.
The historical record alone should make this very clear, never mind the very open and blatant Qur'anic instructions in this regard.
There are two problems facing Britain today: one is the Islamification of society, and the other is terrorism, or the "war on terror."
The BNP will address the question of the Islamification of society by addressing the immigration invasion question outlined elsewhere in this document.
No Muslim nation on earth would tolerate millions of Christians entering and seizing demographic control of their lands, and there is no reason why Britain and Europe should be any different.
The BNP will demand the right of each people to have their own culture, identity and heritage dominate in their ancestral homelands.
In this regard, a BNP government would outlaw all overt signs of Islamic colonisation such as the burka, ritual slaughter, mosques and minarets (which are little more than symbols of territorial conquest).
All of these measures will demonstrate to the world that the British nation is determined to resist the colonisation of its territory.
The BNP will also withdraw from the European Union, which seems set on committing national demographic suicide by allowing the 75 million strong Muslim population of Turkey to join.
Turkey has already relaxed its visa requirements for a large number of Middle Eastern nations, and once in the EU, untold millions of Muslims will have free access to all lands of the EU.
The BNP will combat Islamist terrorism in Britain by halting and reversing Muslim immigration which will reduce the recruiting base for domestic terrorists, and by striking a peace treaty with the Islamic world.
This peace treaty must stipulate that the Islamic world will stop trying to Islamify Britain and the West.
In return, Britain will agree to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of Islamic nations.
This means no more war for oil, and a neutral Middle Eastern foreign policy, not favouring any group in the Middle East over any other.
Renationalising the Welfare State.  The BNP will halt the handout of benefits, housing, education and pensions to  foreigners who have not paid into the system.
The BNP will ensure that the National Health Service is used to serve British people  and not used as an International Health Service.
The BNP will provide education and training for the unemployed to enable them to  get back into work.
The BNP will institute a workfare-not-welfare policy for those who refuse to get  back to work.
The Ideal of the Welfare State Has Been Distorted.  Originally, benefits were meant to be the state's obligation to support those who genuinely were not in a position to support themselves.
This guiding principle must always remain the guiding light for a just and humane system -and it is the core of the British National Party's welfare policy.
Decades of Labour and Tory socialist state-induced welfare dependency has utterly distorted this noble ideal.
Well-meaning welfare programmes have been exploited, distorted and twisted to become nothing more than a free handout to scroungers, foreign and local.
This has in turn created a welfare dependency culture which has led to in excess of six million people living in homes where no one has a job and where benefits are a way of life.
Not only does this cost the taxpayer in excess of £13 billion per year, but it also has a hugely damaging effect upon the psychology of a nation which once led the world in productivity and technological innovation and which gave birth to the Industrial Revolution.
This dire situation must be reversed -urgently.
Workfare, not Welfare.  The BNP proposed to reverse these decades of disastrous Labour and Tory social engineering programmes through a sensible policy of workfare, not welfare.
The principle is simple: those who receive community support incur obligations as well.
People who genuinely want to work must be provided with the opportunity to do so in return for training which will put them back into proper full-time employment.
In return for financial support and training for a new career, the benefit recipient must complete a certain number of hours of work per week.
Properly implemented, this policy will undermine the benefit dependency culture and bring masses of unemployed back into the formal employment sector.
Ultimately there must be only one category of welfare recipient: those who genuinely deserve or have earned it.
The scrounger entitlement mentality must be discarded.
Those who can work but refuse to do so, must face the consequences of their actions.
To this extent, we shall require that those who have been out of work for over 18 months participate in local work schemes in return for their taxpayer-funded benefits.
The success of the "workfare not welfare" policy has been proven: these programmes already exist in Australia, America and even in India.
Britain has to get back to work: and workfare provides the only path through which this aim will be achieved.
Putting British People First.  It is equally important that the burden of foreign scroungers be dealt with vigorously.
Britain has become a land where foreigners come first, and decent, hard-working Britons are exploited.
Immigrants come here and are immediately given council homes while Britons are pushed further and further back in the queue.
The BNP deprecates the current system whereby the fruits of the welfare state, including our benefits and pensions, are distributed freely to those with no historic ties to our nation and, in particular, to immigrants, `asylum seekers' and economic migrants from within the European Union.
The BNP shall legislate to ensure that pensions and benefits are eligible only to Britons and those who have paid into the system over their lifetime.
Pensions and benefits will not be paid to claimants whose residence in the UK has not qualified them to benefit from the Welfare State.
Reduced pensions will apply to claimants whose residence has not qualified them to benefit from the full amount.
The BNP will renationalise the welfare state.
Access to education, the NHS, benefits, council houses and pensions will only be available to the British people and those who have paid into the welfare system.
Freedom for All: The Restoration of Our Civil Liberties.  The BNP will repeal all legislation enacted by successive Labour and Tory regimes  which have usurped the British peoples' basic civil liberties.
The BNP will circumvent the erosion of our liberties by the old gang parties under  the guise of "fighting terrorism" by dealing with the root causes of Islamist extremism  in Britain, namely mass immigration and Britain's biased foreign policy.
The BNP will repeal all laws aimed at restricting freedom of speech, including those  relating to race relations and religion.
The BNP rejects ID cards as an undesirable manifestation of the surveillance  society.
The BNP will repeal the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European  Convention on Human Rights, both of which are exploited to abuse Britain's  hospitality by the world's scroungers.
By withdrawing from the EU, the BNP will not permit British courts to be subservient  to international bodies or courts which override the law of the British parliament.
Terrorism and the Growth of the Totalitarian State.  The BNP condemns the erosion of essential democracy in Britain which has developed partly as a result of the increasingly disastrous multicultural experiment.
Britain today faces domestic terrorism from Islamists as never before in our history -caused directly by the twin policies of mass immigration and a biased Middle Eastern foreign policy.
On the one hand, the old gang parties have encouraged mass immigration which has created a large pool of disaffected Muslims in Britain, and on the other hand the same parties have actively pursued aggressive foreign policies which have served to incite the now UK-resident Islamic population.
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have provided extra fuel to Islamists seeking to recruit terrorists from the millions-strong Muslim population in Britain.
In other words, the old parties have created the "perfect storm" for terrorism in Britain -and now used this self-created problem to justify ever-increasing repressive legislation and the destruction of our civil liberties.
A prime example is the Civil Contingencies Act which grants ministers wide-ranging powers during an emergency, including the right to amend any Act of Parliament except the Human Rights Act.
Islamist terrorism in Britain will not be stopped by repressive laws, but by dealing with the immigration problem and adopting a neutral foreign policy.
Dismantling the Repressive State.  The BNP will repeal all laws designed to suppress our traditional right to freedom of speech, including those relating to race relations and religion.
We note that these laws are rarely enforced when those of non British ethnic descent denigrate and abuse the racial and religious groups indigenous to Britain.
The BNP will halt all moves to introduce ID cards as an undesirable manifestation of the surveillance society.
The BNP will repeal the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights.
This Act and the Convention have a long record of thwarting the rights of the majority and the espousal of politically correct causes.
For example, the British government has recently been forced to prepare measures to enable the right of prisoners to vote -an altogether unjustifiable imposition.
Similar rulings have prevented the deportation of criminal elements and terror suspects.
By the same token, we shall not permit British courts to submit to international bodies or courts that override the law of the British parliament.
The BNP will not permit the extradition of Britons to foreign jurisdictions unless the laws they are alleged to have broken correspond to offences in the UK.
We will reintroduce the requirement of proof and we shall revoke the European Arrest Warrant.
Constitutional Change: Protecting and Enhancing Our Heritage.  The BNP will devolve all powers properly capable of exercise to local level and  revived county council government.
The BNP will create an English parliament in Westminster.
The BNP will create a pan-British parliament to oversee those policy areas currently  determined by Westminster and invite the Irish Republic to join as an equal partner.
The BNP will reform the House of Lords to include non-party political experts and  individuals chosen on the grounds of talent and service.
The BNP will introduce citizens' initiative referenda to force government to adhere  to the will of the voters on specific subjects.
The BNP will introduce a new Bill of Rights which will guarantee certain basic civil  liberties.
The BNP will enact legislation forbidding interference in the electoral process by  third parties not partaking in an election.
The BNP will restrict the use of postal voting only to those incapable of getting  to the polling station on election day.
Devolution: Bringing Power to the People.  While we do not believe that devolution to the Scottish and Welsh assemblies was inevitable, the BNP is happy to accept that the process is in keeping with the democratic nationalist principle of subsidiarity (an organising principle which states that matters ought to be handled by the smallest, lowest or least centralised competent authority).
The problem is that this hasty revision of the Constitution has developed a number of unacceptable anomalies.
Thus, although English MPs are without authority over devolved decisions affecting the people of Scotland, Wales and Ulster, MPs from those places may vote on legislation affecting the English.
More remarkable, perhaps, is that they cannot vote on issues affecting their own constituents, as this is determined within their devolved chambers.
Another problem is that a number of powers wielded by local parliaments has emanated from authority that was previously overseen by our traditional counties.
In effect this placed power into the hands of pompous and overpaid professional politicians who, for the most part, have done not a stroke in their lives to create wealth but who have absorbed it in the course of their careers.
Such a typically New Labour shambles is a recipe for friction and for future division amongst the British family of nations.
The BNP's solution to this interlocking group of difficulties is as follows:  Devolve all powers properly capable of exercise to local level and revived county council government, returning to the ancient and traditional pre-1974 boundaries.
These powers are to include control over planning.
 Create an English parliament in Westminster.
This, and the Scottish, Welsh and Stormont parliaments would oversee such functions of the present devolved administrations as cannot sensibly be accommodated by the county councils.
 Create a pan-British parliament to oversee those policy areas currently determined Westminster, plus those powers repatriated from the EU.
This body would have its formal base in Westminster, though we envisage it would sit in rotation in each of the national parliaments.
 The BNP would create a standing invitation for the Irish Republic to join the pan-British parliament as an equal partner.
The House of Lords.  The role of the Lords as a revising chamber, stripped of its political cronies, requires further assessment.
At this stage, however, we can state that we see an opportunity to introduce not a simply elected duplicate of the Lower House, but a body which might provide weight to specialised experience in certain fields, such as expertise in charities, community groups, industry, commerce, agriculture, the armed forces and such like.
There exists, therefore, the opportunity to bring to bear on government the objectivity of non-party political experts and individuals chosen on the grounds of talent and service.
Further investigation is needed so as to exploit this opportunity for better governance.
Citizens' Initiative Referenda.  The BNP proposes the introduction of citizens' initiative referenda as an important check and balance on the political class.
Individual citizens need only collect the requisite number of electors' signatures on any given petition initiative -the wording of which they themselves will determine -in order to compel the local or national government to hold the relevant referendum.
If passed by between 50 and 66 percent of the voting public, such a referendum would create a comprehensive council/parliamentary debate on the topic in hand.
If passed by over two thirds of those voting, however, the result would automatically become binding.
A New Bill of Rights.  The 1688 Declaration of Rights, which in essence updated the 1215 Magna Carta, was given its parliamentary seal of approval in the terms of the 1689 Bill of Rights.
Later described as the most important document of all time by American constitutionalists, the 1689 Bill of Rights provided the Americans with the basis behind their constitution a century later.
The 1688 Declaration, however, was a compact between monarch and people.
Its articles are therefore arguably inviolable.
To allay any doubts, we shall set out in a new Bill of Rights those parts of Magna Carta and the 1689 Bill of Rights which are still relevant to the modern age.
We do not necessarily believe that a written document will prevent future governments from seeking to undermine or distort the new guarantees we shall provide.
But by setting out, in readily accessible print, a document of universally-known importance, a tripwire will be available with which to alert any future generation that a ruling class has again arisen with concepts above its station.
The Right to Bear Arms.  The right to bear arms is encapsulated in the 1688 Declaration of Rights.
Firearms do not kill people; criminals kill people -especially when the innocent people do not possess firearms with which to defend themselves.
The BNP would restore to legitimate and law-abiding sportsmen the right to possess and use those weapons curtailed by the 1968 Firearms Act and subsequently restricted by later legislation.
Protecting the Democratic Process.  The democratic process in Britain has been subverted by a number of electoral rule changes which have impacted upon the rights of citizens to organise in democratic parties and freely express their opinions.
As a result, the BNP will introduce legislation which will: Guarantee the right of all law-abiding organisations and individuals to organise and campaign free from interference from the state, trades unions, employers' organisations or commercial entities.
Protect all political parties and groups from the use of violence or intimidation for political purposes.
The violation of this law will carry a minimum two year prison term.
Disband all state-sponsored efforts to exploit the ethnic minority vote by means of programmes such as Operation Black Vote.
Restrict postal voting -currently subject to grave abuse -to the sick and elderly or those who are absent overseas.
Outlaw third party organisations who do not contest elections from issuing material designed to denigrate individual candidates or parties, thereby allowing political rivals to circumvent the proper spending limits on election expenses.
Outlaw the conducting or publication of opinion polls in the last three weeks of an  election campaign to prevent manipulation of the democratic process.
Ensure that political parties organise and function only with such funds as they are able to raise from their own members and supporters to ensure that the political process is not bought by vested interests.
State funding, corporate donations and political dues from trades unions will be outlawed.
Electors will be enabled to fire or `recall' their MP in circumstances of serious  criminality.
Reintroduce treason legislation to prosecute those who undermine the British  constitution.
Democracy and the Media.  The BNP will enact legislation which will hold journalists and their media outlets  criminally liable for knowingly publishing falsehoods.
The BNP will create a media complaints body which will have the power to grant  slandered persons or institutions the right of reply with equal prominence plus  financial compensation in serious cases.
The Manipulation of Democracy.  A danger to genuine democracy emanates from the concentration of ownership and control of the mass media -not least foreign ownership, where the primary loyalty is not to the UK.
We refer to the two great issues of the day where there has been virtually no debate, consent or consultation with the electorate: multiculturalism and the EU superstate.
Indeed the media, especially the broadcasting media -and especially the statecontrolled BBC -have actively promoted both.
The silent majority has been denied any debate.
Presently, the `Fourth Estate' is subject to no democratic check or control.
We shall address these difficulties as part of our campaign to strengthen and extend genuine democracy.
The BNP will require that the media tell the truth in its reports.
In the words of the late Lord Northcliffe, "The function of a journalist is to get at the truth." We will enact laws to ensure that the undue influence of the media in terms of free debate is subjected to a democratic system, enabling all sections of our society free and unfettered access.
The ability of the media to propel political parties to power via undue promotion and behind-the-scenes negotiation subverts the political process.
The BNP has been the victim of incessant media mendacity and entirely unjustifiable smears and it has often been denied justice by the Press Complaints Commission.
We shall therefore replace the PCC -an organisation overseen by those interests upon which it is supposed to sit in judgement -with an independent body with the power to grant the victims of media falsehood the right of reply with equal prominence plus financial compensation in serious cases.
For grave offences, we shall create a new criminal offence embracing the `deliberate dissemination of falsehoods about an individual or organisation for financial or political gain'.
We support the right of legitimate editorial comment and opinion, subject to the simple requirement of truth.
Culture, Traditions and Civil Society.  The BNP will take steps to promote the traditional British concepts of civility and  courteousness by ensuring that they are taught in school.
The BNP will oppose the intrusion of non-British and alien cultural influences which  undermine our traditional value systems.
The BNP will encourage the teaching of British history, culture and traditions  at schools.
The BNP will seek to promote the traditional high-street shopping environment over  the out-of-town shopping centre.
The BNP will ensure that National Lottery funding is spent on projects which  enhance British culture, rather than degrade it.
The BNP will introduce formal bank holidays for all of our nations' patron saints.
The BNP will take legislative steps to protect Britain's pubs, which will include tax  concessions, smoking rooms under strict supervision and a lowering of tax on  alcohol served in public houses.
Combating the Erosion of British Culture.  The character of daily life in Britain is becoming corroded by the gradual but inexorable loss of many of those things that made Britain civilised.
Culture, tradition, civility and heritage cannot be reduced to issues of economics or distorted by politically correct interference.
Englishness especially has been undermined in recent years, as has the entire concept of British identity, which embraces so much of the regional and national characteristics within these islands.
As we have previously observed, the people of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland are bound together by blood and this close connection ensures an overlap of culture, heritage and tradition.
We desire the preservation of our culture, heritage, and identity.
Our national character and native institutions are a precious heritage which reflect our origins and are an expression of our genetic identity.
We support a return to the traditional standards of civility and politeness in British life.
Courtesy, which is about consideration for others, should be taught in school, and demanded of government employees in their interactions with the public.
Alien Cultural Influences.  The BNP disapproves of the malign influences of the international media and their promulgation, for example, of `celebrity culture' which is often of a nature that is both pernicious and subversive.
Television should strive to depict improved standards of conduct rather than reducing much within its remit to the lowest common denominator.
Often, the media portrays the white working class in the most negative, unattractive and unacceptable light.
This practice must stop.
Halt the Destruction of Our Traditional Town Centres.  The BNP shall halt, apart from exceptional circumstances, the proliferation of out-oftown shopping centres which undermine the traditional high street.
We shall impose a special tax of one percent of turnover on the large supermarket groups, the proceeds of which will be used to reduce the council tax for small businesses and tradesmen on the high street.
Schools: A Return to Traditional Values.  The BNP will ensure that appropriate areas of public life, including school assemblies, are based on a commitment to the values of traditional Western Christianity, as a benchmark for a decent and civilised society.
Schools will be encouraged to celebrate May Day and similar ancient festivals, but also the great days within our national British calendar.
Traditional British history, culture and citizenship will be taught.
Music shall be encouraged in schools, between the ages of five and fourteen.
In particular, folk songs should be revived and especially those that embody our nation's history.
Those of foreign ethnic descent will be given the choice of educating their children in faith or folk schools that will teach them the traditions and heritage of their ancestral cultures, or of attending classes in schools that educate them about their ancestral heritage.
We believe that all children suffer when deprived of their right to an ancestral identity and contact with their cultural origins.
Art and Culture.  The BNP will ensure that the distribution of National Lottery funds takes place in a fashion which encourages British culture, and not to so-called `modern art' projects that insult, debase and discredit art.
Similar considerations apply to the Turner Prize, which has long become a degenerate icon of modern day social engineering.
The BNP will terminate the type of funding overseen by the National Lottery and ensure it is rebased on sound lines and truly popular causes.
The boards which determine lottery grant applications shall be selected by ballot from lists of individuals who have raised significant sums of money for local charities, or who have a record of voluntary service to the public.
The BNP will safeguard British weights and measures, such as the mile and the pint.
Finally, we propose that each of our traditional saints' days be declared a public holiday in the relevant nations in question, with Trafalgar Day becoming an additional public holiday throughout the UK.
Saving Britain's Pubs.  The public house is in many ways at the core of community life in Britain and very often acts as an informal community centre.
The pub has in fact become part of our cultural heritage and has become as symbolic of Britain as the red telephone box or Dover cliffs.
It is therefore shocking to learn that pubs are closing at the rate of nearly three every week.
The causes of this sad state of affairs are varied.
In some areas it is because the indigenous British population has been ethnically cleansed and the new immigrant communities have no interest in maintaining that aspect of British culture.
In other areas it is the economy, or rather the Government's mishandling of the economy, which is the cause of these closures.
The BNP is dedicated to saving the British pub through a number of measures designed to bring relief to landlords and the public alike.
The BNP will give business tax rate relief to landlords to reflect their role as unofficial community centres.
The BNP will give landlords the right to designate a room in their establishment as a smoking room with the proviso that a powerful extractor fan be provided to protect bar staff.
The BNP will restrict the power of breweries to force tenants to buy only their beer.
-The BNP will introduce a duty-free area for small and medium-sized pubs selling local beers as long as they operate within thirty miles of where the beer is brewed.
The BNP would also reduce the duty on alcohol sold in pubs through an increase in tax on beers and ciders sold in supermarkets.
Time to Get Tough on Crime and Criminals.  The BNP will end the culture where criminals' rights are placed above those of  victims of crime.
The BNP will abolish political correctness from the police service in favour of real  crime fighting.
The BNP will abolish the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) in order to  remove unnecessary bureaucracy from the police services' duties.
The BNP will reintroduce capital punishment for drug dealers, child murderers,  multiple murderers, murderers of policemen on duty and terrorists where guilt is  proven beyond all doubt.
The BNP will reintroduce the right of householders to defend themselves and their  property using whatever means they deem necessary.
The BNP will establish a penal station for extremely dangerous/violent repeat  criminals (including rapists) on the British island of South Georgia.
Removing the Politically Correct Straitjacket from the Police.  Despite unprecedented sums spent on the police, Britain today faces record criminality levels.
Police have been removed from the community.
Traditional and effective bobby-onthe-beat policing has been abandoned in favour of `Community Support Officers', patrol cars and expensive and intrusive technological devices such as CCTV.
Police management has lost its focus on preventing crime and has become subjected to politically correct social work, more concerned with the rights and ethnicity of criminals than with the rights of victims.
This has particularly been the case since the Macpherson Report -a prejudicial, politically correct, left-leaning statement which wrought great damage to traditional policing.
We intend to rebuild the social contract where the criminal was afraid of the police and upright citizens were protected by the law.
The liberal consensus which confuses the criminal with the victim will be abolished.
Politically correct senior police officers will be axed.
The BNP shall: Ensure that the police's priority be returned to the prevention and detection of crime.
Return, so far as practicality permits, to traditional foot and cycle patrols.
Reintroduce corporal punishment in instances of vicious criminality and assault.
Reintroduce capital punishment for child murderers, multiple murderers, murderers of policemen on duty and terrorists where guilt is beyond all doubt.
Examine, carefully, the merits of `Restorative Justice,' where fines imposed by the courts are given in whole or in part to the victims.
Criminals will be forced to repair damage wrought in the community.
Review the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE), which introduced an unacceptable tier of bureaucracy on the police in terms of form-filling.
Examine, carefully, the argument that families should bear financial responsibility for the cost of crimes committed by those of their children beneath the age of 18.
This deterrent would curtail the misconduct of young vandals and criminals.
We are wary of the conditions where millions live in fear of crime, much of which is committed by a relatively small number of serial offenders who have little fear of the criminal justice system.
Reintroduce traditional police uniforms and phase out the paramilitary costumes that have undermined this powerful symbol of traditional unarmed civil authority.
The police are the servants of the people, not the servants of the state.
Reintroduce the right of householders to defend themselves and their property using whatever means they deem necessary.
We shall also examine the culture of law enforcement.
To this extent, we believe it is proper that adults in a community may, on rare occasions, discipline badly behaved children (subject, of course, to common-sense interpretations of Common Law).
Ensure criminals serve their full sentences, with time added for bad conduct.
Early release, embracing 25 percent of the prison sentence, will be permitted in return for a clear demonstration of the acquisition of genuinely useful skills or full rehabilitation in the case of drug addicts.
Parole Boards shall possess the authority to release such model prisoners, if necessary by electronic tagging.
Substantially increase the provision for drug rehabilitation.
An investment of this nature will be justified in terms of helping to negate the link between drug use, addiction and criminality.
 Introduce the death penalty for the large-scale dealing of hard drugs, when proven beyond all doubt.
Establish a penal station for hardened and repeat criminals on the British island of South Georgia.
To prevent corruption, the prison governor will be changed every six months and will not qualify to serve a further term for three years.
The prisoners will be used to construct modern port facilities, suitable for fishing vessels.
Introduce physical labour into the prison service, in return for remission for good conduct.
To this extent, there are numerous areas where electronically-tagged physical labour is required.
Two immediate areas include the urgent re-construction of sea defences and, secondly, the placement of fibre-optic cabling in the rural community.
These facilities, provided by the Prison Service, will produce a welcome source of revenue.
A Healthy Nation: Public Health and the NHS.  The BNP will end the scandalous situation of NHS underfunding by reallocating  money from the foreign aid budget.
The reported NHS deficit is £620 million and  the current foreign aid budget is £9.1 billion.
The BNP will increase spending on front line staff while cutting back bureaucracy  in the NHS.
The BNP will end the £2 billion per year "health tourism" scandal.
The BNP will give priority to employing British people at affordable wages in the  NHS and halt the recruitment of Third World-origin staff who are needed in their  own nations.
The BNP will cut waiting times and service difficulties by relieving the immigration  burden upon the NHS.
The Right of All British People to Healthcare.  The BNP believes in a free, fully funded National Health Service for all British citizens and the right to care and nurture for all sections of our national community.
The biggest problem facing the NHS today is underfunding, particularly for front line staff.
Salaries paid for these essential services are too low and, as a result, skilled British medical personnel are forced to seek employment elsewhere.
The BNP will squash the NHS deficit by halting the £9.1 billion foreign aid budget and reallocating money to the NHS.
This will end all shortfalls and allow an increase in salary levels which will once again attract British people to the service.
The BNP opposes the trend to `talk-down' the NHS, even though the Tory/Labour underfunding problem has put it in a worse position than many of its European rival services.
The BNP believes there has been a deliberate policy to underfund and then denigrate the NHS in order to set the stage for the privatisation `option' to appear inevitable.
This is a problem which can easily be solved through the budgetary reallocation outlined above.
We suspect the impetus behind partial privatisation of the NHS is the submission to the requirements of the World Trade Organisation, whereby signatories must ensure a level economic playing field and remove all labour subsidies.
Many of the social welfare provisions won for the working class by social democratic parties in the last century -state-funded healthcare in particular -fall foul of this agreement.
The corporations which move into such potentially lucrative `markets' are not interested in patient care; they are interested in profit.
PFI schemes have saddled the NHS with enormous costs and we shall institute a review of these schemes, as discussed elsewhere in this document.
We submit that treating illness or injury is not an area that can either morally or economically be overseen for profit.
Organisational Reforms.  "How hard is it to keep a hospital clean?" Very hard it seems, since the last Tory government replaced ward-based staff cleaners with contract cleaning staff and the Blair/Brown regime continued the same system.
The BNP will combat MRSA by replacing contract cleaners with ward-based auxiliaries and returning to in-hospital laundries for all staff uniforms.
In addition, the BNP firmly believes that a return to traditional British staffing levels will help to alleviate the "superbug" problems which have accompanied the rise in nonBritish staffing levels.
In this regard, we refer to the recent shocking revelation from the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, where employees from 70 countries were found working.
Many are from some of the most backward nations on earth, and have such a poor command of English that they are unable to have the most basic conversation -yet are employed in all manner of roles, including cleaners and porters.
This is a recipe for disaster, and the BNP will halt it.
We shall ensure that Britain has an effective, sustainable, free National Health Service.
We shall: Oppose plans to scrap local hospitals in favour of giant, impersonal factory-type hospitals that are distant and remote to relatives.
Ensure that health is assessed on the grounds of patient need, not bureaucratic targets.
Ensure that front line staff numbers are boosted and unnecessary bureaucracy slashed.
End the scandal of foreign `health tourism', which costs the exchequer over £2 billion per annum, often to treat Third World diseases.
We shall also end immigration, which places an additional cumbersome burden on the NHS, at the expense of our own people.
Restrict the pay of NHS bureaucrats, for the most part, to £100,000 per annum.
Encourage the re-employment of staff with school-age children during term-time, designed to clear backlogs of minor operations.
Terminate the recruitment for employment of doctors and nurses from the developing world where their skills are urgently in demand.
Place emphasis on healthy living and healthy diets through the reintroduction of traditional school meals, rich in vegetables and fibre.
A similar scheme, introduced in Finland some years ago, significantly improved the health of the population and much reduced the burden on that country's health system.
We shall further ensure that, whenever possible, hospitals purchase locally produced food, which will be fresher and healthier.
This will assist local business and strengthen the links between hospitals and their communities.
Introduce a public health awareness campaign on the dangers of high-risk, unsafe sex, aimed at combating AIDS and HIV.
Support the nursing unions' campaign for zero tolerance for violence.
We shall introduce democracy to the current NHS boards, to which a proportion of health care professionals will be elected at the time of local elections.
We shall consult widely with charitable organisations specialising in patient care, with a view to empowering them to increase their role, in partnership with the NHS.
Where these prove workable, we shall extend them into other areas, with a view to increasing efficiency.
We shall restore to hospitals the authority of the traditional matron, with special authority over hygiene.
This, we anticipate, will reduce bureaucracy.
We shall increase the number of dentists available on the NHS.
In recent years the demand for such service has risen due to immigration.
Education for a British Future.  The BNP will reverse the budget cuts on education and prioritise this sector as vital  to the rebuilding of our nation.
The BNP will bring back traditional syllabi and teaching methods to replace the |  current and obviously failed systems currently being used.
The BNP will bring back streaming and grammar schools.
The BNP will bring back academic and sporting competition at all levels  of education.
The BNP will offer free university education to deserving students who have  completed their period of Community Service.
Reversing the Destruction of Britain's Educational System.  The BNP opposes trendy egalitarian teaching methods that have made Britain one of the most poorly educated nations in Europe, with particularly low standards of literacy.
Untold damage has been wrought on our nation and to an entire generation whose average level of attainment is now lower than before the introduction of universal state education.
Different individuals are born with differing abilities and aptitudes.
All are entitled to the same opportunity to realise their potential, but this cannot occur by forcing them all into a low-grade `one-size-fits-all' education system.
Dismal educational standards prompt economic decline, incivility, cultural decay and inequality.
We shall rebuild the entire educational system to ensure that no child is unable to realise his or her potential.
We shall reintroduce emphasis on the `Three Rs', especially at elementary level and we shall return to the system of learning by phonetics.
The left has deliberately employed the educational system as an instrument of social engineering and indoctrination.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that British history is rarely taught in schools or that many teachers regard history as a subject to be avoided because it encourages patriotism.
We shall also return authority to teachers and headmasters and place greater emphasis on training young people in the industrial and technological skills required by the modern world.
As we state within our section under the Economy, our country lacks engineers and scientists.
These and other skills, which have been permitted to decline, will be invigorated under our policies.
We shall offer generous subsidies to students -both in terms of their coursework and accommodation -who embark upon such study.
We shall reappraise the notion of student tuition fees with a view to their abolition.
We shall create apprenticeships, especially in manufacturing industry.
We will instil in our young people knowledge and pride in their British history, traditions, identity and origins.
Key Policies on Primary and Secondary Schooling.  The egalitarian, anti-British dogmas that have dominated the educational system for a generation will be replaced with a commitment to competition, excellence and the preservation of British culture.
We will reopen the grammar schools and allow communities the right to choose their introduction, where these schools are absent.
Equally, we support the principle of streaming in all schools, so that the most able are allowed to find their natural level.
To this extent, we expect to raise the standard of learning to those available within the grammar schools.
We shall restore `A' and `O' Levels and public, university and employer confidence in these examinations.
We shall reverse the dumbing-down of the school curricula and raise expectations to the levels of the past.
We shall emphasise British history along with English, Welsh, Scottish and Irish culture and their relation to Western Civilization as a whole.
We shall gradually eliminate bureaucracy in schools and reallocate the saving in salaries to the hiring of teachers and the purchase of textbooks and learning materials.
We shall eliminate politically correct subjects and reallocate funding and the time of pupils to traditional subjects like reading, writing, and maths.
We shall promote a meritocracy in education, so that pupils from all backgrounds may rise as far as their abilities take them.
We will prohibit the promotion of an expectation of failure for working-class pupils, which blighted the educational prospects of many children in earlier generations.
We shall reopen the special needs schools, closed for reasons of egalitarian dogma.
Placing such children in conventional schools, where they are unable to cope, also compromises the education of the children within those schools.
In recognition that especially gifted children have special needs, we would make available additional resources to enable them to attain their potential.
Exclusion policies shall be returned to the hands of head teachers and governors, instead of bureaucrats.
We shall also hold parents to account for persistently unruly children.
We shall examine downsizing of council educational authorities and the reallocation of their funding to local schools.
Competition shall be reintroduced and encouraged at all levels of the educational system, including sport.
Competitive sport teaches espirit de corps, teamwork, and social interaction along with promoting good health.
We similarly attach great value on vocational skills and training.
We shall require all schools to provide traditional well-balanced meals, using locallysourced ingredients wherever possible.
We note that schools are an ideal outlet for the less than visually perfect fruit and vegetables produced by farmers which supermarkets claim cannot be sold.
We shall re-introduce assemblies based on traditional Christian values and worship as a benchmark for a decent and stable society.
We shall encourage parental involvement across the educational system.
Key Policies on University Education.  The BNP's ambition is to make a good high-school education sufficient for many careers, eliminating the need for expensive and worthless university degrees where they are not required.
The systemic disregard by successive Tory and Labour regimes for the creation of an educational system that trains people for jobs is nowhere better illustrated than in terms of the nonsensical degrees that are regularly churned out in universities.
Courses such as `beach management,' `golf-course management,' and `game keeping,' which were once properly learned in apprenticeships, are now widely available in universities.
Politically correct degrees have also proliferated and while they may be of use to `equalities' minded left-leaning councils, they are of little use to the productive economy.
We shall withdraw subsidies in universities for such degrees.
If there remains a demand for these courses, then the marketplace will determine the price and the establishment which offers them.
In addition, the BNP will: Require ideological balance in university faculties, previously a domain of the left.
Abolish the Fair Access Regulator and other politically correct attempts to undermine university standards in the name of social levelling.
On satisfactory completion of their period of National Service, all suitably qualified youngsters will become eligible to receive a fully funded university education.
The less academically qualified will be entitled to paid apprenticeships or training.
We shall therefore scrap targets in terms of which a predefined number of school leavers have to be university educated.
This has been one of the primary causes of the growth in "useless degrees" and will necessitate the re-designation of a number of universities back into vocational colleges.
We shall increase funding for areas of value to the nation, such as technology, science, engineering and traditional culture.
We believe higher education must serve both our economy and the maintenance of our culture and national identity.
We shall introduce bursaries to encourage students to study difficult, unpopular or lengthy subjects that fall within the national interest.
We shall fund industrial laboratories and other means by which university research is useful to industry, science and medicine.
Transport: Getting Britain Moving Again.  The BNP will make rail travel affordable once again by reversing the disastrous  privatisation process which has grossly inflated ticket prices.
The BNP will reduce traffic congestion by bringing the immigration invasion  under control.
The BNP will invest in a high speed 200 mph magnetic levitation inter-city  rail network.
The BNP will seek to decrease the price of fuel which is already comprised of at  least 63 percent government tax.
The BNP will charge foreign trucks for the right to use Britain's road network, as  other European nations already do.
The BNP will encourage and support the development of alternative transportation  technologies to ultimately replace the internal combustion engine.
The Need for State Investment in the Transport Infrastructure.  The size of investment needed to upgrade and maintain the transportation sector means that the state must be involved in the process as profit-driven private sector exclusivity will make it too expensive for consumers to use.
This fact is illustrated by the disastrous consequences of the rail network privatisation -it is now cheaper to fly from London to New York than it is to take a train from Manchester to London at peak times.
It is little wonder that the roads are congested.
Increased investment is required in Britain's public transport system to bring it up to the highest standards in the world and to help relieve the chronic congestion on our road network.
Elsewhere, such as certain South Coast routes, travelling times are slower than at any time since before WWI.
The BNP therefore doubts the merits of rail privatisation, with different companies running monopoly services and tracks -and all still ultimately dependent upon public subsidies, despite paying profits to private shareholders.
New Technologies and New Development.  Britain's railways require substantial investment.
The introduction of super-efficient Maglev trains will become a national transport priority.
Transport projects should be designed in sympathy with the landscape and therefore utilise road tunnels where appropriate.
Traffic congestion, especially in South East England, is the result of overcrowding, immigration and `white flight' from the cities and conurbations.
Our policies to cease immigration and encourage repatriation will have a beneficial respect in terms of congestion.
The BNP will: Seek to abolish the road fund licence.
It is expensive to administer and susceptible to evasion.
The road fund must be supported out of the taxation raised on fuel, which will make it more equitable in relation to road usage.
Inhabitants of rural areas who have further to drive will be compensated by central government grants to county councils for council tax reductions.
According to the Association of British Motorists, 63 percent of the fuel price is comprised of Government tax.
The BNP will endeavour to reduce this burden after making expenditure cuts outlined in the economy section of this document.
Call a moratorium on out-of-town retail developments.
They encourage car dependence, increase congestion, disadvantage the high street, pensioners, single mothers and the poor.
Future developments must concentrate on brown-field sites, linked by public transport.
Free motorists from repressive and restrictive legislation.
Overall motorway speed limits will be raised to 90mph, subject to surface/weather conditions and traffic volume.
Maintain toll free motorways.
Cease the persecution of motorists by phasing out speed cameras except for documented accident black spots.
Introduce a new licence for foreign trucks whereby they will pay in respect of their use of British transport routes.
Such a policy is already in force in Switzerland.
Develop new transport technologies, including hydrogen fuel cells.
Maintain and upgrade our waterways to transport freight.
Reopen disused rail lines, closed under the Beaching closures, where there is local demand and with a view to easing congestion.
Agriculture: Food and Fisheries.  The BNP will promote British agriculture by gradually phasing out the EU's CAP  subsidies and replacing them with a viable UK system.
The BNP will forbid the development and importation of genetically modified  produce.
The BNP will encourage the regeneration of the family farm as the core structure of  Britain's agricultural sector.
The BNP will investigate the need for a massive soil reinvigoration scheme.
The BNP will outlaw non-stunned ritual slaughter of animals.
The BNP will bring back our nation's traditional 200 mile coastal fishing  exclusivity zone.
A Healthy Society Requires a Healthy Agricultural Sector.  A healthy nation depends on a healthy environment and healthy food.
The BNP envisages a strong, healthy agriculture sector and vibrant farming communities as essential to the nations' well-being.
Britain's farming industry will be encouraged to produce a greater part of the nation's food requirements.
Whilst we support low consumer prices, there will be an emphasis on quality and selfsufficiency and, where feasible, the decreased reliance on petrochemical products.
We are deeply sceptical of the merits of GM crops and shall place a moratorium on their further development.
We shall also ban their import into the UK.
The BNP's Agricultural Priorities.  CAP subsidies shall be phased out, following our withdrawal from the EU, and replaced, initially, with the British system of subsidy that existed prior to 1973.
The New Zealand experience will be studied closely.
We will work towards increases in food quality, from a nutritional viewpoint, and environmentally sustainable rural communities.
We shall carefully examine the introduction of pilot schemes and training facilities designed to reverse the long-term shift into giant, mono-cultural agribusinesses and landholdings.
Graduated inheritance tax will be applied to exceptionally large acreages, where presently none exists, but this will also relate to the quality of the land involved.
Our ideal is to restore family farms in place of agribusiness.
Mindful of the effect that BSE and Foot and Mouth disease had upon the farming community, we shall introduce incentives to encourage a new generation of young farmers.
Where feasible, we shall make use of National Service to transform the South East of England in particular.
We favour the establishment of sustainable, mixed agriculture based upon family farms employing high technology and sound husbandry.
We favour healthier and sustainable organic farming.
Local farms will be used to supply nearby schools and hospitals with fresh produce.
Urgent research will be conducted into the potential benefits of a massive soil reinvigoration scheme, carried out with National Service labour.
The work of the Countryside Restoration Trust will be supported, publicised and promulgated.
We shall eliminate unhealthy, energy intensive, cruel factory farming of livestock.
We shall outlaw the cruel ritual slaughter of animals, following the example of Switzerland.
We shall introduce legislation to encourage the formation of producer co-operatives, to enable their bargaining power with the multiples.
Where necessary, we shall strengthen the supermarket ombudsman, to ensure a fair deal for producers.
The BNP's Fishing Policy Priorities We shall restore Britain's fishing industry (which contains the majority of Europe's fish) and re-impose the former 200 mile exclusion zones around our coast, in line with international law.
The Royal Navy will enforce our territorial limits.
Given the plundering of Britain's fishing zones in recent decades, we recognise that a degree of conservation may initially be necessary.
We shall fund urgent research into the environmentally disastrous river, loch and estuary fish farms with a view to proposing constructive solutions.
Energy: Fuelling the Nation's Growth.  The BNP is committed to research into renewable and quasi-renewable energy  sources and transmission systems, such as wave power, hydrogen fuel, and nuclear  energy.
The BNP rejects the notion that our nation's nuclear power stations should be  owned by foreign investors.
The BNP opposes the punitive taxation mandated by the other parties' adherence  to the global warming theory and the "carbon credit" racket.
The BNP will stop the building of wind turbines which are inefficient and blight  the landscape.
The BNP will investigate clean-burning coal-fired power plants as another method  of dealing with increased energy demands.
The Energy Crisis Must be Addressed.  Britain faces a severe energy crisis which has been caused by a combination of an increased population, privatisation, failure of forward planning and the closure of coalfired power stations.
Once the immigration problem has been dealt with, demand for power will go down.
This by itself will not solve the problem, but will significantly alleviate it.
The BNP is urgently committed to a policy of national energy independence, based, as far as possible, on renewable energy sources.
Key BNP Energy Policies.  We shall fund research into renewable and quasi-renewable energy sources and transmission systems, such as wave power, hydrogen fuel, and nuclear energy.
We shall end the current government's policy of meeting Britain's Copenhagen obligations, which are based on the unproved science of `man-made' global warming.
We shall increase nuclear power generation with a view to providing 40 percent of the UK's energy requirements.
The UK was once a world leader in nuclear power but the technology was discouraged by successive governments and exploited abroad.
The last world-class British nuclear power company was sold by the Government in 2006.
We shall ensure that nuclear power stations in Britain are returned to mixed British public and private ownership and not run for the profit of foreign investors.
We shall cease the pointless construction of inefficient wind turbines.
So far, over 2000 have been built, at vast public subsidy, but they contribute less than one percent of the UK's energy needs.
Billions have been earmarked by the Government for their ongoing expansion -which forms the essential part of our EU obligations to generate a percentage of our energy from renewable sources by 2020.
We oppose the thesis behind `carbon capture'.
This is a technology that not only doubles the price of electricity but is undeveloped and potentially environmentally damaging.
Britain continues to possess significant reserves of coal, sufficient perhaps for several centuries depending upon the rate of consumption.
We shall therefore support the construction and reconstruction of coal-based generation plants, with the most modern clean air technology.
We shall repeal the ill-informed Climate Change Act and all related EU legislation that is detrimental to our interests, including the EU's Carbon Tax.
Foreign Policy: Putting British Interests First.  The BNP will realign British foreign policy to put our nation's interests first.
The BNP will undertake not to interfere with the sovereignty of any other nation,  and those in the Middle East in particular.
The BNP would only deploy British armed forces in a conflict in which Britain's  interests were directly involved.
The BNP will end the foreign aid swindle and reallocate the money saved to help  British people.
Britain's Interests First.  British foreign policy must be driven by one guiding principle alone -to serve British interests above all else.
This iron principle will be strictly enforced by a British National Party government.
In reality, this means that Britain's foreign relations should be determined by the protection of our own national interests -and not by our like or dislike of other nations' internal politics.
Britain has no right to dictate the internal politics or social configuration of any other nation.
We would also expect all other nations to grant this same right to Britain.
A Neutral Foreign Policy.  We would have no quarrel with any nation that does not threaten British interests.
In this regard, a BNP government will: Reach an accord with the Muslim world whereby they will agree to take back their excess population which is currently colonising this country, in exchange for an ironclad guarantee that Britain will never again interfere in the political affairs of the Middle East or try to dictate to any Arab or Muslim country as to what their internal government form should be; and Maintain an independent foreign policy of our own, and not a spineless subservience to the USA, the `international community', or any other country.
With regard to Europe, a BNP government will: Resolutely oppose the single European currency; Support the overwhelming majority of the British people in their desire to keep the Pound and our traditional weights and measures.
At the same time, a BNP government will strive for the best possible relationship with our European neighbours.
The nations of Europe should be free to trade and cooperate whenever it is mutually beneficial without being forced into a straightjacket of political and economic unification -which is neither desirable nor beneficial, ultimately practically unfeasible, and guaranteed to create conflict rather than avoid it.
Accordingly, a BNP government will withdraw from the European Union.
In place of the EU, a BNP government will aim towards greater national self-sufficiency, and work to restore Britain's family and trading ties with Australia, Canada and New Zealand, and to trade with the rest of the world as it suits us.
Following our withdrawal from the EU, the BNP government will use the £43 million per day net contribution Britain at present makes to the European Union to fund many far more useful projects at home.
An End to the Foreign Aid Swindle.  In addition, a BNP government will reject the idea that Britain must forever be obliged to subsidise the incompetence and corruption of Third World states by supplying them with financial aid.
Only once poverty and deprivation amongst British people has been eliminated, can any thought be given to foreign aid -and even then, a BNP government will link foreign aid with our voluntary resettlement policy, in terms of which those nations taking significant numbers of people back to their homelands will need cash to help absorb those returning.
The billions of pounds saved every year by this policy will also be reallocated to vital services in Britain.
Housing: Sheltering the Nation.  The BNP will allow local authorities to borrow on the open market to provide  housing in their locality.
The BNP will abolish the Homes and Community and Regional Development  agencies and transfer regeneration and housing functions to local councils.
The BNP will place each local council under a legal duty to build a number of  homes set to a percentage of the waiting list total each year.
These would only be  available to British citizens.
The BNP will introduce a "local connection test" for any applicant seeking social  housing in terms of which they would need to demonstrate a positive and historical  link to the area.
The BNP will create a national infrastructure bank to promote regeneration and  national infrastructure renewal.
The BNP will relieve part of the housing crisis by halting and reversing the immigration  invasion.
The Housing Crisis Facing Britain.  Decades of Tory/Labour regime neglect combined with mass immigration have created the most serious housing shortage in living memory.
The most recent figures indicate that more than two million people are on the waiting list for social housing; that fewer homes are being built now than in 1928; that many first time buyers cannot afford a large enough deposit to access a mortgage from banks (despite the extent of the taxpayer bail out of the banking system); that overcrowding is now a feature in many families, even in the most affluent areas; and that many owner occupiers cannot afford to modernise their homes because of cost.
The housing charity Shelter has produced detailed research raising questions about local authorities failing to meet local needs through the availability of affordable housing.
The old-gang parties have conspicuously failed to ensure the availability of social housing, despite the fact that it would have taken a fraction of the money employed to bail out the banks to have successfully solved the housing crisis.
Key Points of the BNP's Housing Policy.  All local authorities would be permitted to borrow on the open market to provide housing in their locality.
New housing development bonds would be offered by local authorities to the money markets.
Councils would preferably seek to raise funding on a collective basis, thereby improving the security of the bond and reducing the likely coupon.
The Homes and Community and Regional Development agencies would be abolished and the functions of regeneration and housing would be transferred to local councils and dealt with via the Local Development Framework process.
This will ensure that major planning proposals are overseen locally and not by remote government ministers or inspectors.
Direct funding would go to every local authority for the building of new homes.
Every local council would be under a legal duty to build a number of homes which would be a set percentage of the waiting list total each year.
These would only be available to British citizens.
New community development vehicles would be created to promote housing cooperatives and self-build.
Such organisations would enjoy statutory funding from the local authority.
In order to meet this goal, non-green belt land held by the local authorities would be transferred at nil market rates in return for nomination rights.
The new community development vehicles would have delegated planning authority powers.
The new community development vehicles will prepare a business plan and sustainability strategy within the first year of their existence against which they will be audited and penalised as necessary.
Community ownership should also be real and not merely token in nature.
In order to qualify for social housing, new applicants would be required to meet the local connection test, whereby the applicant would need to demonstrate a link to any given area, by birth or employment.
Because social housing is a finite resource (given that two million homes have been sold under the "Right to Buy" scheme), we must ensure that only genuine and deserving cases have access to new housing provision.
The BNP would create a national infrastructure bank to promote regeneration and national infrastructure renewal for the 21st century.
This would be similar to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The BNP would not permit housing associations to convert to PLC status.
We further recognise that many Housing Associations have previously experienced financial difficulties and would therefore increase the grant rate for development.
The BNP believes in quality rather than quantity.
In order to protect Registered Social Landlords, we would break up monolithic structures which are a feature of modern housing and often bureaucratic by nature and would introduce measures to verify senior management competence and practice.
The BNP recognises the importance of planning in the 21st century, but we do not believe it necessary to possess a Master's degree to enter the planning profession.
Mostly it requires common sense and practical experience.
The BNP will refocus the Local Development Framework to concentrate on borough wide regeneration, housing, economic development and private sector involvement.
This would operate in conjunction with new county bodies to oversee local regeneration and infrastructure which would draw upon skills from the private and voluntary sectors.
The BNP will enact legislation protecting the rights of property owners and residents from anti-social behaviour and from illegal squatting by so-called "travellers." The BNP will address one of the major causes of the housing crisis by solving the immigration invasion.
The Economy: Putting Britain Back on the Road to Recovery.  A BNP government would tackle the national debt problem by cutting expenditure  on all projects which do not serve British interests.
These expenditures which will be cut include the annual costs of £18 billion spent on "global warming," the £13 billion spent on immigration, the £4 billion spent on asylum, the £15 billion spent on EU membership, the £9.1 billion spent on foreign aid, the billions spent fighting illegal and immoral foreign wars, and the billions spent on "politically correct" social engineering projects.
The BNP undertakes not to reduce front-line public services while billions of pounds  continue to flow out of the country to foreign interests.
British people must benefit  first from British tax income.
The BNP aims to relieve the tax burden by raising the personal non-taxable  allowance to £12,500.
The BNP will encourage the family unit by reintroducing the married man's allowance  by as much as £2,500, depending upon the presence of children.
The BNP will raise the inheritance tax level to £1 million.
The BNP will work for a reduction in council tax through the slashing of all politically  correct council functions and "diversity" schemes.
The BNP would take some of these savings and invest them in rebuilding British  industry and skills through an active protectionist policy as many other European  nations already do.
The BNP will rebuild Britain's skills base -lost through decades of deindustrialisation caused by successive Tory and Labour regimes -by offering generous subsidies to students who study engineering and science and to institutions offering such education.
The BNP will ensure that globalist corporations pay their fair share of the tax burden.
We will close down the legal loopholes which allow tax evasion through Transfer  Pricing and the outsourcing of jobs to foreign nations.
The BNP will therefore introduce legislation to ensure that a foreign acquisition  of any significantly-sized British company is judged to be in the public and national  interest before it can proceed.
The BNP will pass legislation to separate utility (high street) banks from the  investment banking sector to prevent a repeat of the credit crisis.
The BNP will oppose the privatisation of natural monopolies such as Royal Mail.
How Britain's Industry and Economy Has Been Destroyed.  Britain's economy today is built upon a foundation of unsustainable rising debt and record trade deficits.
The Lab/Lib/Con alliance long ago abandoned any attempt to run the British economy for the benefit of the nation and have surrendered it to the dead hand of EU regulation and a rootless, amorphous globalist philosophy.
Inept governments, trades union militancy during the `60s and `70s and the increasing momentum of globalisation have combined to wreak extraordinary damage to the British economy, our industry and technology.
Britain, which was once a world leader in many technological and scientific fields, has had entire industrial sectors of our economy extirpated.
Factories, long closed or transferred overseas, cannot be re-opened when vital technical skills have been lost.
`White flight' or indigenous emigration, estimated to be in the region of half a million per year, has meant the loss of many of our skilled technical workers.
Any policy designed to repair this damage will take many years to complete and must involve governmental restructuring of both the educational system and the economy.
The tiger states of East Asia, such as South Korea and Singapore, operate their economies and industries in the national interest and that is the economic model which Britain should emulate.
Education's Key Role in Rebuilding Britain.  Official figures show that our country lacks engineers and scientists, a sad indictment on a nation that has produced approximately 50 percent of the world's inventions.
These and other skills, which have been permitted to decline, will be invigorated under a BNP government.
We shall offer generous subsidies to students -both in terms of their coursework and accommodation -who embark upon such study.
Only in this way can new industries, skills and inventions be created upon which the manufacturing, engineering and scientific base of our nation can be reinvigorated.
We shall also increase funding to the research, scientific and technological departments of our universities, tripling it in the first two years and progressively raising this investment as results accrue.
The BNP fully endorses the "Manifesto for Physics" issued by the Institute of Physics which, independently of our party, calls for an increase in funding for the scientific community's educational programme.
Reinventing and Rebuilding British Industry.  It is nonsensical that Britain exports it know-how and many of its most talented people to overseas competitors so that they may develop their industrial base and then undercut and undermine our industries at home.
Our task will be to redevelop our industrial, scientific, technological and manufacturing base and, in so doing, reinvent our economy.
In pursuance of this aim, we shall place significant criminal penalties on the export of technology and inventions, which will be permitted only by government license.
Cutting Government Expenditure.  With the current budget deficit at record heights, it would be grossly imprudent to increase Government borrowing, except in a case of dire emergency.
Fortunately, a British National Party government would find considerable scope to raise revenues without increasing the tax burden.
Unlike the other parties, the BNP plans to cut all expenditure which is not in the national interest, rather than cutting front-line services to the British people.
These cuts would include: The Climate Change Scam The cost of so-called man-made climate change is estimated at some £18 billion per annum.
The BNP has highlighted the nonsense that has been employed in support of this fraud, visited upon the electorate by the three old gang parties in order to facilitate international governance and opportunistic corporate profit.
The £18 billion levy is made up of subsidies and the `green levy' that is charged to current energy bills.
Consumers pay these disguised costs often without even being aware.
The Immigration Racket The cost of the multicultural society (which has been imposed without any debate whatsoever by the three old gang parties and promoted by the Greens, UKIP, the SNP and Plaid Cymru) is estimated to be in the order of £13 billion per annum, according to MigrationwatchUK.
This embraces the cost of social security, crime, health tourism and NHS costs, translation expenses, unemployment, equalities legislation, education, related bureaucracy and much else.
The asylum swindle costs Britain in the region of £4 billion per year in terms of benefits, housing, support and legal fees.
EU Membership The cost of the EU for Britain in membership fees falls a little short of £15bn.
Whilst a portion of this flows back to Britain, it may only be spent in such a manner as is prescribed by unelected EU officialdom.
The costs related to EU membership are in reality far higher.
The Taxpayers' Alliance has estimated the savings to the economy of withdrawal from the EU, largely in terms of the regulatory burden, at £118 billion, and this does not even count the cost of damage inflicted upon our agricultural and fisheries industries.
While the halting of this cash haemorrhage will not immediately accrue to the Treasury, it will boost the British economy and ultimately enhance the taxable revenue base.
According to Open Europe, the expense of complying with EU rules cost each British household £4,912 over the past 11 years.
The Foreign Aid Scandal The cost of overseas aid is currently at some £9.1 billion per year.
This cash goes directly to nations who very often are not in need of such aid (China and India, both of whose economies are larger that Britain's), or to utterly corrupt states where it serves no good at all.
To make matters worse, it is the declared intention of all the other parties to increase foreign aid to around £13 billion per year.
The BNP would halt all foreign aid while there is poverty and deprivation inside Britain.
Quangos and Politically Correct Social Engineering Schemes Billions are spent every year funding assorted quangos such as the Equalities and Human Rights Commission and the myriad of ethnic organisations.
By cutting funding to these schemes and eliminating waste, bureaucracy, inefficiency, and unnecessary jobs in these quangos, we anticipate saving at least some £10 billion per year.
Illegal and Immoral Foreign Wars The BNP will immediately end British involvement in all illegal and immoral foreign wars into which the Tory/Labour regime have plunged Britain.
The cost of the war in Iraq is estimated to have been some £49 billion, while the cost of the war in Afghanistan is set to rise from £3 billion to £5 billion per year.
Revenues and Taxation.  The UK Treasury forecasts that the nation's debt will exceed 75 percent of gross domestic product by 2014 (£167 billion), up from 43 percent just a few years ago.
Worse still, a recent paper by the Bank for International Settlements forecast that the UK's debt will rise to 300 percent of the GDP by 2040.
Current government fiscal policy has borrowed growth from the future which must be repaid.
In particular, the vast cost of bailing out the banking sector will be paid by the next generation.
It is estimated by the Institute of Fiscal studies that within four years, more than 10p in every pound of tax Britons pay will go towards the servicing of the Government's ballooning debt interest bill.
Many of the ratings agencies regard a country as entering fiscal crisis and a likely downgrade in its credit rating once its debt interest payments exceed 10 percent of tax revenues.
Whilst we appreciate that a certain amount of debt is required by the Government, especially during recession, our view is that debt crowds out private investment and should be minimised.
As a result, the BNP sets itself as a goal the reduction of the debt to GDP ratio of some 30­40 percent.
Such a ratio will compare favourably with our competitors and will also reduce the debt burden and servicing costs to future generations.
It will also free up money for investment into infrastructure and services of direct benefit to the British people.
Stimulating the Economy: Lower Taxation Must Be the Ultimate Aim.  Excessive taxation reduces productive activity and Britain has already reached a point at which further increases in tax rates will yield no meaningful revenue.
The BNP aims to lower taxation rates, both immediately and over the long term.
Immediate cuts which can be made which are feasible, affordable and especially desirable: A rise in the personal non-taxable allowance to £12,500 The BNP will raise the personal non-taxable allowance to £12,500.
It is ridiculous that the lowest and poorest section of the community should be taxed on subsistence wages.
To offset this, repeated governments have introduced a myriad of credits, for which those affected must apply and at a vast cost to bureaucracy.
In other words, the Government increases taxes on the one hand, and then employs a bureaucracy to supplement the living standards of the poorest section of the community on the other.
The BNP will halt this double-edged spending madness by simply raising the personal allowance to £12,500 before any tax becomes payable.
The savings in bureaucracy alone will more than compensate for this move.
Reintroduce the Married Man's Allowance To encourage and reward the family unit, the BNP will reintroduce the married man's allowance by as much as £2,500, depending upon the presence of children.
This, in conjunction with the £12,500 above, will raise the point at which tax is payable by married couples.
This change may result in some off-setting upward movement in the basic rate at which tax will commence.
Our aim is to maintain revenue neutrality, remove an enormous burden of bureaucracy and, not least, to incentivise the lowest earners in the community.
Increase the Inheritance Tax Threshold to £1 million Inheritance tax (IHT) is, in effect, a double tax as it taxes the already taxed income of a deceased person.
We do not believe that an individual's life work should be appropriated by the state.
The BNP will therefore raise the inheritance tax threshold to £1 million.
Corporate Taxation: We believe in dynamic, profitable companies.  Taxation in essence makes the Government into the equivalent of a shareholder in private undertakings by withdrawing a "dividend" in the form of tax revenue.
The greater the profit achieved by the corporation, the greater the tax income which accrues to the government for the benefit of the nation.
We therefore believe in creating an environment which is healthy for businesses and consumers alike though dynamic competition.
However, it is of great concern that globalist corporations are able to effectively circumvent their tax burden by exploiting legal loopholes known as transfer pricing and by outsourcing jobs to factories and call centres overseas.
To combat the latter phenomenon, the BNP will introduce a special `level playing field' charge on companies that evade taxes in Britain by outsourcing.
Transfer pricing is the practice whereby assets, services and funds are exchanged within globalist corporations through their various subsidiaries.
The transfer price can be manipulated to affect the "profits" and therefore taxes paid by the international arms of a large corporation.
In essence, profits are transferred through this internal process to countries where taxes are low.
Globalisation has enabled, for instance, a microchip company to design products in one country, manufacture in another, hold patents in another and assign marketing rights to a company elsewhere.
This structure provides enormous discretion in allocating costs to each country and shifts profits through international trade.
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), some 60 percent of world trade consists of internal transfers within multinational corporations.
That, in turn, provides opportunities to transfer profits across borders.
By weighting their costs to the UK, where taxes are relatively high, corporations are able to reduce their taxes to the Exchequer.
The effect of this process is two-fold: the shortfall in taxes must be made good elsewhere and, secondly, domestic corporations -especially Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SME) -are placed at a disadvantage because they must pay corporation tax at the full UK rate.
A recent media report revealed that three leading banana companies, which control two thirds of the worldwide banana trade, generated $50 billion in sales and $1.4 billion in global profits over a five year period -but paid only 14 percent taxes on profits.
In the UK, these companies reported combined sales of over £400 million but paid a paltry £128,000 in tax.
Nearly a third of the UK's 700 largest businesses paid no corporation tax in the year 2005­6, according to figures from the National Audit Office.
This situation is untenable.
The BNP will scrutinise, very carefully, the activities of the multinational corporations and the accounts of their various subsidiaries so as to ascertain their tax savings.
We oppose the view that the international profit and market share of the globalist corporation, facilitated by laissez-faire economics, should assume priority over the interests of the nation state, British companies and their employees.
Small and Medium Sized Enterprises.  One of the most important inhibiting factors on SMEs--which provide the larger part of Britain's employment--has been the vast layer of regulation which emanates from the EU.
A BNP government's withdrawal from the EU will enable us to alleviate the onerous weight of regulation that is so harmful to SMEs.
This encompasses well over 100,000 different laws and regulations, all created since the Conservative government signed the Treaty of Rome in 1973.
Many of these regulations are onerous to business, job creation and profitability.
They undermine employment opportunities, especially for part-time and older workers.
The working time directive is but one example and, inter alia, it imposes a strain of record keeping required for compliance purposes.
For the larger company, the cost of regulation can more easily be absorbed as an overhead but this is not always viable for SMEs.
A BNP government will balance the interests of SME employer and employee rights by repealing burdensome rules and regulations on companies employing 20 persons or less.
Relieved of excessive regulations and bureaucracy, SMEs will thrive and this will stimulate private sector employment.
Foreign Investment and British Companies.  The BNP welcomes inward investment.
There is, however, a difference between `replacement' investment and `additional' investment.
By `replacement' investment, we refer to the takeover of British companies in a process which has been ruthlessly encouraged in the name of laissez-faire economics and globalisation by the old gang parties.
In the past decade or so, such great names as these have fallen to foreign takeovers: Cadbury, BOC, ICI, Corus, Hanson, Abbey National, O2, Scottish Power, BAA, P&O, Scottish and Newcastle, Lucas, Plessey, Rolls-Royce motor cars, amongst others.
By `additional' investment, we refer to the establishment of new investment and technology, such as the creation of the Nissan plant some years ago in Sunderland.
When a large British company is taken over by a foreign concern, several things occur.
First, the revenue streams from these companies flow overseas.
Secondly, the corporate headquarters usually follows likewise.
Similarly, the vital function of research and development is likely to pass abroad, along with the technological know-how of the company concerned.
Not least, the corporate and employment taxation revenues, previously available to the British government, become jeopardised, especially when British factories are closed and jobs transferred abroad.
The recent disgraceful closure of the Corus plant is a case in point.
This caused thousands of redundancies and the transfer of vital strategic manufacturing to India.
This activity, in our view, equates to criminal economic vandalism.
When Jungheinrich, for example, bought Lancer Boss, the German company replaced the British banks with German banks; the company's insurance passed to Allianz and SAP became the computer system.
British component suppliers were replaced by continental suppliers.
We propose to deal with them by differentiating between `additional' investment and `replacement' investment, as follows: `Additional Investment': The UK provides a large affluent market.
The BNP welcomes `additional' investment, and the skills, expertise, technology, capital and machinery generally associated therewith.
`Replacement Investment': The BNP welcomes overseas investment in British companies which might otherwise fail.
However, the BNP deprecates the takeover of great British companies by overseas concerns which in recent years, has embraced much of our commercial, manufacturing and commercial base.
We shall therefore introduce legislation to ensure that each acquisition of a significant British company is judged to be in the `public and national interest'.
It will be the task of the bidding company to demonstrate that their takeover fulfils these requirements.
In situations where a takeover is deemed to satisfy the `public and national interest' requirement, we shall legislate to ensure that, in certain situations, a minimum equity stake will also remain in British possession, either privately or in terms of a stock market flotation.
Finally, we must register our particular dismay at the takeover of British utilities by overseas concerns.
Utility companies provide a reliable income stream and we shall require the divestment of foreign ownership thereof in an appropriate and orderly manner.
The BNP is further committed to ensuring that natural monopolies such as the national rail network be returned to state ownership as this is the only manner in which the necessary infrastructure investment is possible.
Globalisation and the Protection of British Industry.  The BNP opposes globalisation which is extremely harmful to our nation for two reasons: It results in the importation into the West of millions of immigrants (in the form of "cheap" labour) from the Third World; and It transfers technology, manufacturing and industry to the Third World.
This in turn causes the exploitation in labour in those nations and ultimately the collapse of our own living standards due to the inability of our industries to compete with that "cheap" labour.
The BNP also objects to the existence of disagreeable practices in the Third World, often tolerated by globalist corporations in the pursuit of international profit.
Such examples include the employment of child labour, the use of political and other prisoners to produce goods, lax environmental rules that would not be tolerated in the West, poor protection for workers, the absence of trades unions and employees' representation, onerous working hours, an absence of social security systems, health insurance and so on.
Clearly, this places overseas enterprises at a considerable commercial advantage and facilitates cheap competition.
We are also aware of the restrictions many countries impose to protect their home industry, either in the form of red tape or direct tariffs.
We shall therefore impose selective tariffs on the import of goods from the Third World.
Only those foreign nations and corporations who agree to abide by our strict social, environmental and ethical trading policies will be permitted to export their goods freely into the United Kingdom market.
To allow industry and commerce to adapt, tariffs will be imposed gradually through the years of our first term in office.
We are wary of the burden this may place on British consumers.
In consequence, to avoid any general upward price movement, we shall reduce VAT (or such equivalent as we may introduce) with a view to securing revenue neutrality.
As already observed, some 60 percent of the world's trade occurs as internal transfers within multinational corporations.
This is detrimental to the environment and the measures outlined in this manifesto will diminish this proportion.
Not least, the option of closing down British manufacturing or services in favour of the Third World will become an unattractive proposition.
Finally, whilst we oppose globalisation, we would observe that the process creates disequilibrium within developing countries where self-sufficiency is eroded in favour of cash-crops, for example, at an expense to the environment.
Financial Markets and the Banking Crisis.  The rebuilding of the British economy will generate attractive conditions for investment and it will be necessary to harness the skills and expertise that the city of London and its regional hubs provide.
A healthy stock market will form a part of our strategy to raise and attract capital.
The BNP differentiates between the numerous valuable activities within the City, such as investment, fund management, insurance, etc, and the recent excesses within the banking sector.
These excesses were recently described by Lord Turner, Chairman of the Financial Services Authority and a banker himself, as "economically useless," and he also described the `bonus culture' as having created "excessive risk-taking." Traditionally, banking was regarded as an important utility to oil the wheels of the productive economy.
Today, departments within the banking sector have become speculative vehicles where vast bonuses are earned in financial markets, at no risk of personal loss to the traders concerned.
Monies are being gambled, in the knowledge that shortfalls will be borne by the bank but any profits will be richly rewarded.
We recognise that when the economy is healthy, the banking sector provides significant tax revenues to the Treasury.
By contrast, during recession, difficulties within the banking sector often cause dire difficulties in the real economy.
The bankers then expect the Government to stand behind the sector -a process known as `moral hazard' -which excuses even greater risk-taking in the good times.
This is unacceptable and creates misery, not least to the taxpayer, which has to make good the price of overconfidence and short-term profits.
To obviate these widespread concerns, we propose the following measures: A rigid separation between the utility (high street) banks and the investment banking sector.
The former will no longer be permitted to invest in derivatives, private equity or speculative instruments.
The latter will not be permitted to engage in retail or corporate deposit taking.
The elimination of the short-term bonus culture.
All bonuses to be paid in instruments connected to the underlying departmental profit, over a three to five year period.
The restoration of the authority of the Bank of England (which will be renamed to the Bank of Great Britain) to oversee the regulation of the City and banking sector.
The removal of the assumption that any institution is too big to fail.
Whilst the Government should properly guarantee the savings of retail and corporate depositors within limits, the Government will not act as a bailing mechanism for shareholders or bondholders.
This applies particularly to banking failures.
Rather than bailing out the reckless individuals who cause such collapses, the state would be far better off picking up the pieces to form a national reconstruction bank where individual savers would have their savings protected and guaranteed.
The increase of minimal capital ratios to 10 percent of assets, with downward flexibility permitted in times of recession, as determined by the Bank of England.
The doubling of capital required by banking institutions engaged in proprietary trading.
The division of Lloyds Banking Group, which has clearly exceeded an appropriate size in a competitive economy, following its recent ill-judged takeover of HBOS.
We are also sceptical of the presence of vast international banking corporations, whose political, economic and global ambitions are very different to our own.
We shall not hesitate to introduce legislation to break up these financial combines, if necessary, to require their British activities to be divided into national subsidiaries, either with local partners or via a flotation on the London market.
We shall strictly forbid their intrusion into the political domain.
We expect the measures above to address the imbalances created by the bankers' bonus culture.
Where this does not occur, we shall employ the taxation regime accordingly.
Finally, we applaud the recent discussion of the introduction of a `Tobin Tax' on spot conversions of one currency into another.
Its application, however, would only be feasible by international agreement and we suspect there is an absence of determination to apply it.
Private Finance Initiative (PFI) Schemes.  We are deeply sceptical about PFI, both in terms of the public interest and their efficiency, methods and operations.
The small print of the 2009 Budget revealed the costs of PFI projects would rise to over £10 billion a year between 2014­18.
PFI ensures that private sector consortiums build and run major public infrastructure projects.
The consortium raises the funding and the Government pays this back plus profit over the contract, which typically lasts between 25 to 35 years.
While private investment may well have a useful role to play in the financing of certain public services, we regard the present PFI system as one of the great corruption scandals of an era in which financial corruption in political and business life is regrettably endemic.
PFI as it stands is a recipe for the corporate looting of Britain's national common wealth, a mechanism for turning essential public services into private profit centres.
We would halt all such schemes and institute a wide ranging audit into all existing projects.
The inquiry will include extensive police investigations into the business interests and subsequent directorships and similar rewards enjoyed by the politicians who have voted to facilitate the largest theft of the `commons' since the Enclosure Acts.
Assets and payments reclaimed for the public purse following successful prosecutions would be returned to the control of democratically elected political bodies, ranging from councils to Parliament as appropriate.
General Issues.  There are several truisms that should be observed in any oversight of the economy: 1. Not all aspects of material well-being are measurable within the economy.
Thus,  a child may be better cared for at home than in a day-care centre, but the economic  statistics record merely the latter activity.
This creates the illusion that we possess a higher material standard of living when we purchase things that were formerly produced within the traditional family.
There are other examples of how the obsession for Gross National Product misrepresents our material well-being.
Social and environmental degradation do not show up in the figures.
A safe neighbourhood that requires no private security guards shows a lower level of economic output than a dangerous neighbourhood, where every business must hire such protection.
Numerous lawyers settling disputes by expensive litigation provides another example.
We therefore reject the thesis that economic output is necessarily connected with material well-being.
2. Related to the above is the misconception that because immigration increases GDP,  it must be favourable to the economy.
   Immigration merely raises economic activity.
It does not raise GDP per capita; instead it undermines wages and productivity.
If immigration increased the GDP and general wealth of a society, then logically it would be far better for mass immigration to take place into Third World countries to boost the economies in those nations.
3. Immigration creates environmental pressures, congestion, the concreting over of  the rural landscape and severe housing shortages.
Housing shortages create upward pressure on property prices and lifelong debt for the average family.
Our supply of land is finite.
4. Sustainable income is relevant.
As trustees, we hold an obligation to future generations  of Britons.
Economic "quick fixes" abound, but they exact a price in the long run.
Thus, unions that exact wage increases which their employers cannot afford, produce corporate bankruptcies and redundancies.
Similarly, governments that spend borrowed money oblige future taxpayers with repayments plus interest.
5. Capital investment is sound economics.
Long-term prosperity depends upon  capital investment and provides the dividends for those in retirement.
  The BNP supports policies designed to raise the national savings rate and the reconstruction of a broadly based, profitable and sustainable British economy.
Similarly, we support incentive schemes designed to encourage employee financial participation in their company's activities, via the taxation regime.
6. The taxation system is in urgent need of overhaul.
Far too many professional  people are involved in administering the complications within the tax code or  advising thereon.
Far too many businessmen struggle with complex record keeping.
7. Our views of the economy are founded in pragmatism.
We believe in low taxes,  commensurate with running efficient, productive and superlative services.
The reforms we introduce will be gradual, to permit evidence of the efficacy and operation.
8. Where national or local government makes investments, tenders should be given  to British companies unless there are exceptional and compelling reasons not to.
Given our intention to develop essential infrastructure, especially in energy generation, we envisage the creation of new industry and we shall specially favour new companies in this regard.
We also favour workers' co-operative and workers' ownership schemes within  industry and commerse which have worked well for companies such as the  John Lewis Partnership.
The party's economic policy supports the principles of Distributism, whereby ownership and control of the economy should be distributed as widely as possible.
Council tax is too high.  The BNP intends to cut council tax significantly by eliminating the expensive network of politically correct social engineering projects and the unnecessary, often EU-imposed bureaucracy which all councils are forced to maintain.
To this extent, we shall abolish all politically correct council functions, including those appertaining to `climate change'.
We will conduct a full audit of the extent and cost of these typically superfluous operations once we take control of our first Unitary Authority council, from which we shall prepare a general assessment.
Furthermore, we deprecate the outrageous salaries paid to council employees at taxpayers' expense.
We shall limit council salaries to a maximum of £100,000 per annum.
This will generate vast savings for local taxpayers and limit the profligate pension schemes which many senior council officers fund for themselves with public monies.
Quantitative easing.  The fact that the banking system has been able to increase the supply of money electronically has confirmed the long-held nationalist interpretation of money creation, namely that it is possible to generate `valid' banknotes quite literally out of nothing.
This new money has been employed to purchase gilt-edged stock, with a view to lowering interest rates.
We would have employed at least a significant element of the new funding to create capital projects and investment in new infrastructure in the energy and transportation sectors -which would also have created real jobs.
Currently, new money -excepting for the very small fraction of money that comprises notes and coin -enters into circulation as an interest bearing debt from the activities within the banking sector.
The banking sector is undoubtedly efficient in allocating credit but the question is whether the nation's credit should, in part or in whole, be created under Crown authority? In such an event, would it not best be employed to finance the public sector, thus enabling a reduction in taxation? The right to issue money should ultimately rest with the state, and not with a consortium of private bankers.
Quangos and public services.  The estimated cost of Quangos (quasi autonomous national government organisations) varies between £46 billion to upwards of £150 billion.
Chief executives and others, often favoured in terms of their appointments, receive exorbitant salaries from the public purse.
Meanwhile, the average voter is painfully aware that the quality of public services such as those in the NHS, educational sector and public transport has not improved.
Clearly, Labour has directed increased public spending towards tiers of bureaucrats.
It is no accident that these public administrators of the state are the core supporters of New Labour.
Our primary programme for the reform of public services will be the elimination of bureaucratic positions and the reallocation of funds to direct providers of services.
Privatisation.  Generally, privatisation is a solution only where real competition demonstrably produces better services and prices for the consumers of those services.
Where there are natural monopolies in operation, however, privatisation is generally unacceptable.
We therefore oppose, for example, the privatisation of the Royal Mail, which, along with the Post Office, we shall safeguard, as both provide essential public services.
With regard to Royal Mail, the BNP will oppose the cherry-picking of its most profitable routes by private contractors.
This causes a shortfall in revenue streams and an inevitable inflationary price rise in service costs to the public.
The public's right to a universal service is a paramount consideration.
Within this consideration, we also deprecate the transfer of essential governmental functions to overseas commercial enterprises, who benefit from a guaranteed stream of taxation-funded revenues.
The legal profession.  Law is perhaps the one remaining profession that has yet to be subjected to the bracing wind of competition.
Legal fees comprise a significant cost to private individuals and SMEs.
It should be possible for enterprises such as banks and building societies to employ legal advisors to advise the public directly -a process that has been described as `Tesco-law.' We shall scrutinise very carefully the restricted practices observed within the legal profession and remove them unless they specifically work in the interests of consumers, rather than lawyers.
We shall also insist on greater price transparency and competition.
We note that the Law Society oversees the functioning of the legal profession but we shall ensure that competing legal bodies, properly regulated, are established to compete with the present monopoly institution, as already occurs in the accountancy profession, for example.
These new bodies may specialise generally or in chosen fields.
The BNP's objective.  It is our desire to rebuild and encourage a strong, vibrant, dynamic, innovative and competitive economy and industrial base, predicated upon the demand that it operates in the national interest.
It is a primary responsibility of government to create such a framework.
It is also our wish:.
To provide our people with the opportunity to attain a high, rising, secure and  dignified standard of living; and.
To protect the nation from influences that might damage this opportunity.
Creating local economies.  The BNP would support local economies by creating a national network of autonomous  credit unions.
The BNP would investigate the viability of voluntary local currencies as a means of  assisting local economies.
Credit unions to build local economies.  The BNP supports the creation of local economies via the creation of a national network of autonomous credit unions.
These credit unions will be used to assist low income families to secure mortgages, allow individuals on low incomes to secure low interest and interest-free loans and to support the development of small local businesses.
They will also be employed to fund community and social re-development, provide housing projects specifically for local families and to invest in renewing the social environment in our communities by, for example, establishing youth and senior citizens' clubs.
The credit unions will also be employed to undertake local environmental reclamation projects to improve both the local, natural environment and to instil a sense of civic pride in our communities.
We will encourage credit unions to assist with the creation of local farmers' markets, community farms, local renewable energy production units, energy efficiency projects and to establish local recycling units that employ local people.
Can local currencies boost regional economies?  In economics, a local currency is defined as a currency not backed by a national government and intended to trade only in a small area in what amounts to a formalisation of the barter system.
The BNP will investigate the viability of such schemes with the aim of assisting in the economic development of local economies.
Such an investigation will focus on the local currency experiments in Britain, Canada, America, Australia, France, New Zealand and Switzerland where they have been used to raise the resilience of local economies by encouraging re-localisation of buying and food production.
The BNP would like to see credit unions and, if possible, local currencies, work together to rejuvenate local economies at the community level, rather than via top-down direct state economic action.
Pensions: looking after our old people.  The BNP aims to increase the state pension to £150 per week within the duration of  the first Parliament.
The BNP will link the state pension to earnings which will ensure that pensioner  incomes keep pace with the cost of living.
The BNP will reduce the current annual allowance for tax relief on pension contributions  from the present amount of approximately £230,000 to £75,000.
A solution to the public sector pensions crisis must be found through a national  conference with all the players -employers and workers' representatives.
Part of the solution lies in raising the age of retirement to 68 over a period  of years.
The BNP will enact legislation to ensure that pensions are eligible only to Britons and  those who have fully paid into the system.
The BNP will vigorously oppose the UK taxpayer being called upon to subsidise any  pension underfunding crisis elsewhere in the EU.
The pensions crisis and the BNP's answer.  Pensions come in three forms: the state pension, private sector pensions and, finally, those of employees in the state sector.
The underlying benefits to the government of an efficient and effective pensions system are twofold: a) To minimise dependence on the state -and therefore the taxpayer -in old age.
b) To encourage long-term savings and, therefore, investment.
The state pension.  The BNP will seek to maintain the link between the state pension and earnings.
This is designed to ensure that our pensioners maintain their standard of living and are not plunged into poverty as time goes on.
It is estimated by Age Concern that up to 2.5 million pensioners live below the poverty line.
This is entirely unacceptable.
This has been accentuated by steadily rising energy prices, occasioned by the fraud surrounding the concept of `man-made global warming', which we reject and to which we refer elsewhere in this manifesto.
The BNP seeks to raise the guaranteed state pension to £150 per week within the duration of the first Parliament.
This will embrace all credits and financial benefits to which the pensioner might previously have been entitled.
The funding for this increase will at least partly be derived from the savings identified earlier in this manifesto -primarily the cost benefits arising from the termination of Britain's EU membership fees.
The private sector.  In recent years, the private sector has experienced considerable shortfalls in funding.
These arise, primarily, from increased life expectancy rates, weak conditions in investment markets and the long-term fall in interest rates affecting, therefore, the coupon on government bonds.
The Labour government's removal of tax credits has also undermined investment returns.
We shall re-instate the tax credit.
Most corporations have altered their pensions policy from one of defined salary/ benefits to one of defined contributions.
To this extent, we would observe that in a mobile economy, where employees frequently move jobs, loyalty to a particular company has waned markedly in recent decades.
It is not the function of a political party to dictate pensions policy in the private sector.
It is, however, our task to ensure that private pension funds are regulated to ensure they meet their contracted commitments to their members.
The same applies to corporations in the reducing instances of final salary schemes.
The public sector.  Nearly a quarter of the workforce operates in the public sector.
This amounts to some eight million employees.
Pension provision for this group is, for the most part, unfunded and therefore a liability to government and, consequently, the taxpayer.
It has been variously estimated that the funding required to meet this unfunded commitment may extend to as much as £1000 billion.
A solution must be arrived at by full and open consultation with employees and their representatives.
Changes can only affect future contributions and future credits earned.
The age of retirement.  Life expectancy continues to rise.
The result is an increased burden upon the exchequer in terms of the cost of the state pension and the loss of income-generating employment.
It is also a fact that many employees do not welcome retirement at the statutory age.
These people have a wealth of expertise and wisdom, still of value in the private and public sectors.
The BNP proposes gradually to raise the age of retirement to 68 over a period of years.
Both public and private workers will be affected and early retirement schemes, funded by the public sector, will be terminated.
Tax relief.  The purpose of tax relief on pensions is to encourage long-term savings, so that the beneficiary may be financially secure when retired.
Unfortunately, those who are in most need of financial security are also those who save the least.
By contrast, higher rate taxpayers, who least require government tax rebates, generally save the most and account for more than half the cost of pension tax relief.
We do not support this system which in effect rebates tax to those who least require it.
We shall therefore reduce the current annual allowance for tax relief on pension contributions to £100,000.
Nest proposals.  The Government intends, from 2012, to implement a scheme under which employers and employees will also be required to fund a minimum annual contribution into a pension scheme, embracing 8 percent of qualifying earnings.
This will be made up of a minimum 3 percent employer contribution, which will be added to tax relief, plus the worker's own contribution.
Employers and employees will be permitted to increase their contributions.
The BNP is broadly neutral in terms of this measure, with one important proviso: we reject compulsory enrolment in the scheme.
Pensions credits.  According to the Pensions Policy Institute, running the pensions' credits' scheme is so complex that it requires 18,000 civil servants to administer it.
We believe in simplicity.
We note that many potential beneficiaries do not claim, such are the complexities, and we believe that many consider the process of claiming to be demeaning.
As a result, our intention is to overhaul completely the system to streamline the process and make it more efficient.
In so doing, we believe a considerable saving would be achievable in the reduction of the costs of administration.
By raising the guaranteed state pension to £150 per week, we will already have taken significant steps to accomplishing this task.
EU pensions' crisis.  We note that there is a severe underfunding crisis emerging in many member nations of the EU, far exceeding the difficulties in the UK.
The BNP will vigorously oppose any attempt by the EU to oblige the UK to subsidise the shortfall.

A fairer deal for the retired.  The BNP will end the national scandal of elderly people being forced to sell their homes to afford nursing care.
This will remove a source of discontent amongst pensioners who have saved during their working life to look after themselves in old age.
We shall expect those pensioners with adequate private means to contribute to the provision of residential care or home nursing costs.
To alleviate the alleged labour and skills shortage, often employed by establishment politicians to excuse mass immigration, we shall encourage active pensioners to continue working beyond retirement age, on favourable tax terms.
IT AND THE DIGITAL REVOLUTION: THE BNP'S VISION.  The BNP will reinvigorate the IT sector in Britain with massive investments in  technology universities.
The BNP will institute a policy of protectionism for the local IT industry and jobs.
The BNP will nationalise the telecoms infrastructure to enable the creation of a not for-profit 100Mbps broadband service across the country.
The BNP will invest in technology universities to provide the skills to our people to  take their rightful place as world leaders in the IT industry.
Building britain's it skills base.  The IT service sector -like all UK industries -has suffered greatly through years of neglect caused by the de-industrialisation policies followed by successive governments.
The gutting of the British manufacturing sector, which includes IT, will be reversed by a BNP government through a two-handed approach.
The BNP will engage in a massive policy of inward investment and protectionism of UK industries to rebuild our industrial and technological base.
The funds for this will be taken from the budget cuts outlined in the economic policy section of this document.
The BNP will build technology universities specifically designed to teach IT, train up our own people and serve as centres of learning and excellence to train the next generation of IT software and hardware experts.
This obviates the Tory/Labour regime's policies of importing foreigners to do jobs that British people should be doing, a situation that is particularly prevalent in the IT sector, and has been identified by the Association of Personnel Service Organisation (APSO) as a cause of unemployment in the UK IT industry.
Restoring the infrastructure to state control.  The BNP's long-term strategy for the communication sector is closely tied in to the party's policy of restoring the natural monopoly infrastructure to national ownership to ensure an effective universal service.
Once this process is completed, the state-owned telecoms infrastructure will be under the same universal service obligation (USO) applied to the Post Office.
The Royal Mail is legally obliged to deliver mail across the country at a standard price and at set service levels.
There is no reason why the telecoms infrastructure should not be obliged to deliver similar service objectives on a non-profit basis, which will then boost the entire economy by solving the problem of a lack of digital and rural broadband availability.
Key BNP it policy points.  The BNP will ensure that all personal data held by the state on any individual be made freely available to that person; The BNP will ensure that all personal data held by private agencies such as credit bureaus should be available to the persons concerned at no cost, and that such agencies should not be allowed to `blacklist' any person without recourse to a court of law where a specific misdemeanour could be proven.
The BNP says that internet piracy could only be defeated by focussing on the uploaders of copyrighted material, and not on the downloaders.
The BNP is opposed to the distribution of medical files and data of individuals held by the NHS to third parties.
A BNP government would scrap the National Identity Scheme because it is an intrusive invasion of privacy, and the Rural Payments Agency IT system, because that will become redundant upon Britain's withdrawal from the EU.
Conclusion.  The manifesto you have read is a working document.  As political, economic and social change occurs, or as new technological advances are developed and new knowledge is uncovered, our policies might adapt.
However, we will never alter our fundamental values or principles, which call for national and cultural regeneration.
Those values embrace our commitment to the principle of national sovereignty, and our commitment to ensure that these islands will remain our homeland for all time.
Furthermore, our principles demand that all economic and social structures, institutions and legislation, must be built or developed around the fundamentals of ensuring the freedom and security of our people and maintaining our unique cultural and ethnic identity.
We believe that the material contained in our manifesto will strike a chord with ordinary British folk who are deeply concerned about the future of their country and the way it is run today.
Britons have been betrayed by the old parties and their politicians; they have been fleeced to pay for public services which do not deliver, and they have been gagged by political correctness.
The British National Party has the policies, plans and people to put the great back into Britain.
We hope that we can count on your support to start this process.  ©2010 British National Party.  All rights reserved.  Printed and promoted by the British National Party, on behalf of the British National Party, all of PO Box 14, Welshpool, SY21 OWE
